Intervention
participation
perception
Case studies of language activism
in Catalonia, Norway & Scotland

iii



1. Introduction
1.1.

Background

Just checked in. Apartment is in central Oslo where the two events
I am attending are scheduled to take place. A few anxieties are going
through my head—it’s not clear how many or who will turn up
tomorrow, and I wonder who will be there that I know/am friends
with. […] I’ve optimistically printed out 20 consent forms, but I
doubt I’ll get anything greater than 5. Let’s see. Tomorrow is a full
day from 9:30 until late. I will try to eat something filling and get
an early night. 19:17 2
What you have in your hands—or more likely on a screen in front of you—is
a little different to the thesis I had in mind when I submitted my proposal in
2018, for some pandemic-related reasons that should be obvious, and other
reasons I will later explain. A now slightly tatty notebook of field jottings, a
bound heft of transcriptions and subsequent translations of twelve semistructured interviews, and an overabundance of print and digital media feed
into my dataset, although these data will never be wholly exhaustive of the
people, organisations, and events that I had intended to examine and observe.
Looking back at my very first fieldnotes from September 2019, I realise that a
lot of the ideas I had behind my doctoral research, and the plans I had made
in order to get it all done, have changed considerably.
Nevertheless: this thesis presents ethnographic and discourse-oriented
research on cases of language activism in Catalonia, Norway, and Scotland,
and altogether forms an open discussion about extant approaches to research
on both the language activism that is being done, and the language activists

2

Fieldwork diary, page 1 (20 September 2019).



Introduction
May 2022 which presented these conclusions alongside my research
trajectory, a recording of which is available for posterity.3

1.1.1. The matter at hand: language activism in sociolinguistic research

Speakers are the agents of change. It goes without saying that
speakers change language and that the term ‘language’ is an
abstraction over the collective behaviour of a speech community
[…]. (Hickey 2012: 404)
As language varieties are observed to undergo structural change over time,
and language policies are both created and instituted through various power
structures

such

as

state

governments,

sociolinguists

and

linguistic

anthropologists alike have been drawn towards the study of external agency
and the social life of speakers [sic]—perhaps more correctly, users of language
(Milroy 2009; Hickey 2012).4 By examining language attitudes and language
ideologies in any given society, we in effect pay attention to “feelings and ideas
about various languages and linguistic forms as a critical factor in
understanding language change, language and identity, and language in its
socioeconomic context” (Kroskrity 20165). Fundamentally, how these
ideologies and attitudes are broadcast, interpreted, behaviourally negotiated,

3

James Konrad Puchowski, “For ein språkaktivist det kan jo mange vera: theoretical
reflections on ethnographies of Nynorsk, Catalan and Scots language activism”, (paper
presented to the Multilingualism Research Forum/Fleirspråklegheitsforum, University of
Oslo, 25 April 2022); https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZrLoNx-i4pI
4
The reader will notice the use of the term “speaker” throughout this thesis in reference to
language-users. I am conscious of the implications of using this term given its capacity to
erase the experiences of users of non-spoken language as well as brush over the
multimodality of language-use; this is also relevant in the case of Nynorsk, which is a
written standard and not technically a spoken from of the Norwegian language
5
No page numbers given.

19



Introduction
internalised and propagated/re-broadcast through cultural practice outlines
how social debates and discourse about language are sites in which various
actors and organisations vie to promote and/or counter sociocultural beliefs
about language.
Consequently, language attitudes and ideologies (as overt and covert
behavioural orientations towards language) are not just espoused through
debate and discourse about language (i.e., metadiscourse), but also culturally
embedded in how language is used, where language has an indexicalising
function, and where it is seen as a reflexive system where meaning is both
situated and dynamic, and linguistic variation also embodies the construction
of language ideology in real time (see Eckert 2018; Dynel 2020). Speakers, as
actors in social life—you, me, everyone—are inherently involved in the
construction of how linguistic behaviour becomes meaningful in everyday life,
as explained by Gal & Irvine:
Ideology, for us, is not like a miasma that hovers over a community,
or like a rock that hits someone on the head. Instead, we understand
it as productive – as part of people’s creative interpretations of their
situation and part of their consequent social action. (2019: 14)
This conceptualisation of language ideology accepts that we as actors in social
contexts are involved in the reception, renegotiation, and retransmission of
ideologically laden behaviours. Language ideology should not always be
interpreted as some sort of powerful, authoritarian control from above that we
are all subject to—rather, it is always cross-communal and cultural by nature,
which Gal and Irvine also describe as “the active making of social life” (ibid.).
Over at least the last two decades, sociolinguistic research has turned
considerably more towards the examination of topics in language policy and
20



Introduction
planning “from below”, where language policy can be conceptualised not just
as laws, texts, and legislation, but as dynamic and regimented beliefs about
language and linguistic behaviour (see Linn 2010a). This has meant
incorporating a broader evaluation of how language is used within social life,
and the way that individuals, and their capacity to group themselves into
collectives, pressure groups and grassroots organisations, may try to engage
in social action to counter prevalent language attitudes and ideological
currents. Much of this work has also incorporated anthropological approaches
to the social study of language, such as the implementation of linguistic
ethnography, a method centred on informed observations of behaviour and
individual linguistic biographies; such methodologies allow us to illustrate
how “language use is considered a form of social action, [where] issues
surrounding power and agency become central” (Ahearn 2017: 302).
General linguistic research has, in turn, increased its focus on notions
of agency and language’s cultural capital; besides studying language’s
propositionally communicative function, now “we must go beyond the study
of [grammar] and venture into the world of social action where words are
embedded in and constitutive of specific cultural activities” (Duranti 2009: 1),
with the understanding that language is also used as a cultural resource and a
marker of identity, status and belonging. Language-users therefore are
sociocultural agents by virtue of their behaviour and use of the meaningmaking tool that is language, further embedded in discourse that, in essence,
creates language:
Was (eine) Sprache ist, wird nicht dadurch bestimmt, wie wir
sprechen, sondern wie wir über Sprache sprechen—oder anders
formuliert: Sprache wird, als konstitutive Bestandteil sozialer
Wirklichkeit, diskursiv konstruiert.
21



Introduction
[What (a) language is, is not decided through how we speak
language, but how we speak about it—or put another way:
languages are discursively constructed as a constitutive component
of social reality] (Dorostkar 2014: 22) [translations are my own]
Language is consequently inseparable from its cultural context—in
other words, language is not a “reflection” of society (Williams 1992: 66; see
also Blommaert 2018)—and is the domain of various of social actors involved
in the (re)transmission of ideology about language. Accordingly, this thesis
presents papers that examine language as a site of discourse and social action.
In this exciting, dynamic, yet complex world where language is used in a range
of socially meaningful ways, one might still want to ask what researchers
continue to mean when terms such as “language activism” are used to describe
examples of social action concerning language, and there are many various
documented definitions, perspectives, and interpretations. To begin this
discussion, I refer to Bernard Spolsky’s Language Management, where he writes
that language activists are “significant participants in language management”
(2009: 204). What makes these participants significant is not particularly
elaborated upon, although this framing does suggest that a language activist
is identifiable in social life and is someone whose actions are considered a
specific (or “significant”) form of action. This has also meant that some refer
to language activism as a component in the “mechanics” of ideology and
language change (see Shohamy 2008) but still without going detailing who
the activists are, what their aims are, and how they are differentiated from
other participants.
Besides Spolsky’s definition—which, whilst potentially authoritative or
useful for some researchers, is by no means the only one out there—the body
of work on language activism is vast, and the term “language activism” can
22



Introduction
appear interchangeable with a range of related terms such as “language
advocacy” (see Jaffe 2007: 59ff; also Heller, Pietikäinen & Pujolar 2018) in
cases of perceived endangerment, or “language revitalisation” where cultural
resources may be developed and institutions work alongside speakers of a
language to raise the status and use of a given language variety (Urla 2012:
9ff; Putra 2018: 26ff). These two terms in particular would appear to focus
their attention on different aspects of social action with regard to languageuse and other cultural practices, but both also share related “artefactually
oriented practices, such as linguistic description and documentation, and
politically sensitized attempts to affect patterns of everyday language use,
language socialization, as well as language policy more generally” (Karlander
2017: 15).
So as to distinguish “language activism” and related terms from
everyday language-use, narrowing down its attributes—in other words,
having

a

more

essentialised

definition—may

be

desirable

within

sociolinguistic theories of language variation, change and shift. Since language
varieties vary not just due to typological and language-internal tendencies, if
languages undergo structural change, and if language-users are known to use
different language varieties in varying contexts and points in time, being able
to highlight who exactly is acting, who might catalyse change and shift, and
who acts “significantly” (to paraphrase Spolsky), may prove both interesting
and useful from a theoretical perspective. At least, if the term “language
activism” is a point of reference in sociolinguistic discussion, openly reflecting
over what exactly we are referring to and how we have used the term to
distinguish categories of social actor would be an engaging exercise of
examining language activism not just as a tangible thing or activity that exists
out in the world, but also a theoretical concept. This does not refer to language
activism solely as a language planning process that is external to language-use
23



Introduction
itself, or something that is limited to the development of language status
through the mechanics of government or other “top-down” institutions—
rather, there is a social reality that “language activism” is an illustration of
how social action such as language-use and ideological discourse is indicative
of how “every language practice carries a social cost, and status is the product
of social contestation in a context defined by scarce symbolic and material
resources” (Hill 2010: 52-3). What, then, is inferred by “language activism”?
Who are the language activists? What do they want, and how do we locate
them in social life? Are they politicians, educators, authors, poets, journalists?
Are they located within grassroots, bottom-up organisations, or also outwith
them? Do they work alongside “top-down” actors? Where academics have
become more aware of their role in the legitimation of voices and challenging
dominant power structures (cf. Avineri et al. 2019), can they also be linguists
and others within the academy? What is their focus in the work they do? And
who can they not be—as in, how would we distinguish them from other
categories of actor, especially in frameworks of variation and change?
These are not questions that necessarily need answered. It may not be
even necessary to want to have a strict definition of language activism on the
grounds that, from an alternative perspective “activism manifests differently
at different times and in different contexts” (Combs & Penfield 2012: 461).
Alternatively, one may just admit that there is more than one “type” of
language activism:
The myriad instances of language activism reflect a shared desire of
the activists that the homeostasis of their languages be perceived as
healthy, with a mission to expand the social functions and the
linguistic

structures

of

expression

within

their

language

communities and greater societies […] The activists articulate a
24



Introduction
feeling that their languages have been ignored by the larger society
and often by the minority group itself. (Peltz 2017: 664)
The questions I bring up are therefore not a discussion that represents
an existential crisis amongst linguists, nor a particularly contentious debate—
however—I propose across this body of work that attempting to reflect over
these questions will allow researchers to engage more critically with the
terminology and concepts that inform our description of (often, minority)
language issues and our current understanding of language and social action
in sociopolitical contexts. To this extent, this thesis is a theoretical reflection,
chewing the proverbial cud about language activism across different accounts
and representations in sociolinguistic research.
Where definitions of language activism have been proffered by others,
my own observation over the course of at least five years of postgraduate study
is that they express different flavours of the original case-studies which have
informed a researcher’s attempt at a definition. I would also argue that this
leads to a situation where some interpretations are not always applicable when
compared with other potential case studies of activism. For example, in one
chapter by Florey, language activism is defined as “[undertaking] languagerelated activities ranging from documentation, training and skill-sharing, to
materials development, language programmes, raising community awareness
and encouraging participation in language work” (2008: 121). However, this
framework is informed by documentation of endangered languages, and as a
matter of illustration, application of this framework would not necessarily
extend as easily to larger language communities such as Catalan, the Swedish
language in Finland, or Kurdish (Hakulinen 2018; Junyent 2020; Lewis 2020).
The cases mentioned, whilst not necessarily endangered languages—and not
undocumented either—are still the site of discourses of minoritisation,
25



Introduction
discrimination, domain-loss, or movements which lobby “top-down”
institutions. However, this should not be a surprise:
Since different kinds of minorities face distinct threats from state
nation-building, their corresponding minority rights claims will also
differ. (Kymlicka 2001: 1-2)
Our terminological situation is complicated further if one tries to focus
on language activism primarily as a phenomenon within Indigenous and/or
post-colonial contexts; the introductory paper of a special issue of Multilingua
on language activism in 2017 operates with an interesting interpretation of
the term, in that it is frequently referred to in opposition to “Western”
structures of power and hegemony (Makoni & Criss 2017: 534ff). Whilst not
irrelevant or even particularly erroneous given the insightful and important
work in the settings that are featured in this issue, such a rhetorical framing
has the potential to deemphasise potential case-studies of language activism
in such “Western” and presumed socioeconomically privileged contexts. This
factor is in part the rationale for writing this thesis, where my case-studies of
Catalonia,

Norway,

and

Scotland

are

sites

of

minority

language

metadiscourses in 21st century Europe, and also sites of comparable activist
movements both historically and in the modern day (see also Puchowski 2017;
2018). I go into some detail about this shortly.
Issues of interpretation and definition also extend to how language
activism is understood outwith the academic ivory tower, where one might
refer to “folk” discourse about language (Coupland & Jaworski 1998: 23; see
also Albury 2017)—although, exactly where one is meant to draw the line
between academic language specialists and non-specialists can be contentious
(cf. Kulbrandstad 2008: 85). Nevertheless, as explained in by Maas in one
26



Introduction
case-study, the politicisation of Welsh language politics has led to accusations
from other civil society actors that Welsh language advocates are inherent
nationalists, which Maas argues is a “failure to cognize society’s diversity—
failure to recognize either certain kinds of participants or their issues at all, or
failure to distinguish between those participants and attitudes ascribed to
them” (2012: 353). Consequently, participation in social discourse about
language, and the indexical associations between language and concepts such
as nationality and political identity, together run the risk of framing language
advocacy as necessarily politically adversarial or being associated with social
beliefs which for others may be either controversial or politically distasteful.
As a further example, in a study on contemporary Basque, Heidemann (2010)
considers language activism as activities specifically embedded in grassroots
collective action and the development of linguistic rights, more specifically in
education systems; that is to say that activism becomes the domain of the
public educator. Indeed, there is the potential for significant blurring of what
is general social activism versus activism specific to language, as Blackwood
notes in his work the Corsican context:
Although it is the case that there is frequent blurring of the
distinction between the two groupings of activists, especially in the
second half of the twentieth century, there are individuals,
associations and movements who, by their actions, mark themselves
out as Corsican language activists. (2008: 5) [emphasis my own]
Specifically in Blackwood’s account, he mentions that other scholars
have previously identified that linguistic authority in a community need not
be necessarily associated with those who are in formal control, such as
politicians (ibid.: 4), and conceptualising a language activist within the
27



Introduction
European context has often required researchers to seek out those who have
an overt and active association with an activist identity by virtue of their
political action and associations with nationalist and/or regionalist
movements that go beyond the conceptual boundaries of linguistic identity.
Blackwood’s work in particular is one illustration of showing that the linguistic
reality on the island of Corsica is not the consequence of “top-down” political
action—or, indeed, inaction—but that various examples of social action over
time (explicitly activistic or not) have been able to maintain a Corsophone
community, symptomatic of post-WWII developments on the island that
necessitated “national unity” (ibid.: 44) due to with increasing demographic
shift, the reorganisation of French state government structures and the
manner in which mass industrial change affected the relative stability of social
networks in Corsican-speaking communities—the use of Corsican in social life
therefore attained different values and meaning in an ever-transforming
society. There is consequently significant blurring between various social roles
that developed on the island, and where language-use in and of itself becomes
a contested practice, the situation Blackwood describes is illustrative of how
language activists may not necessarily be best conceptualised as a contained,
separable grouping or entity:
[… W]e should acknowledge that squeezing under one umbrella
term the spectrum of all the language activists who have given time,
energy and even financial support to Corsican is potentially
problematic […]. Language activism has meant differing things to
different groups of people over the two hundred and fifty years of
French rule. (ibid.: 133)

28



Introduction
As researchers in language studies—be it sociolinguistics, linguistic
anthropology, or the sociology of language—we are altogether presented with
diverse understandings of language activism across multiple studies and
theoretical frameworks. As stated, diverse conceptualisations of the
prototypical language activist can at times lend themselves towards other
terms to describe various activities: to add further terms to this list, there is
language reclamation (Hornberger 2017), language documentation (Lane
2014; Bodó et al. 2022), or corpus planning (Di Biase 2018), amongst others.

1.1.2. Summary of grounded theory ethnography: Norwegian Nynorsk

Prior to the start of my doctoral research, I had been focused on language
activism in Norway, looking specifically at organisations whose work concerns
the Norwegian Nynorsk written orthography and use of dialects across the
country. I spent ten months in Norway between August 2015 and June 2016
during a university exchange during my undergraduate degree and during this
time joined Norsk Målungdom, the youth wing of the organisation Noregs
Mållag. I also completed further fieldwork in January 2017 and again in
January 2018, the cumulative results of which were presented in an MScR
dissertation in 2018.
Norway is an interesting case-study in language policy and wider
sociolinguistic research due to the marked dialectological and orthographical
heterogeneity of the Norwegian language, in addition to its relationship with
the wider Scandinavian dialectal continuum where there is considerable
mutual intelligibility between contemporary Norwegian, Swedish, and Danish.
In addition to two state-sanctioned written standards of the Norwegian
language—Bokmål and Nynorsk—there is no one single spoken prestige
standard, and therefore use of regional dialects in all areas of daily life and
administration is noticeably commonplace (Kulbrandstad 2018). It is
29



Introduction
important to highlight that because of the relatively recent full independence
of the Norwegian nation-state in 1905, following the establishment of
autonomous government during Norway’s personal union with Sweden in
1814 after over 400 years of Danish rule, active language debates about the
“Norwegianisation” of the then extant use of Danish spelling conventions in
education and administration, and counter-cultural struggles towards the
establishment of a uniquely Norwegian written standard have together fed into
contemporary language ideologies and conceptualisations of the Norwegian
language vis-à-vis Danish and Swedish, involving the input of various authors,
academics, linguists, teachers, poets and politicians, ultimately culminating in
the creation of civil society organisations such as Noregs Mållag and follow-on
groups such as Norsk Målungdom (see Almenningen 1981; Vaagland 1982;
Venås 1984; Bakke & Teigen 2001 for further discussion).
As a newer and more radical proposal within this språkstrid (language
conflict; see Vikør 2018), contemporary Nynorsk (lit. New Norwegian) is
founded upon the original proposals of Ivar Aasen (b. 1813, d. 1896) to create
a written standard centred in Norwegian dialectal diversity outside of
bourgeois, upper-class, administrative, bureaucratic, Danish-using urban
population centres; notions of a Norwegian language at the time were tied
with growing National Romantic sentiment and the desire amongst many to
return to the unique and distinctive qualities of Norwegian speech rather than
the stylistic and lexical prestige of Danish (Jahr 2014: 23-4). Estimates
propose that about 600,000 people use Nynorsk in today’s Norway, or about
15% of the resident population (Grepstad 2015: 52). Bokmål (lit. booklanguage) on the other hand is used by the overwhelming majority of people
in Norway and is the standard used in all major population centres; it
represents a written standard that is for the most part a continuation from
Danish where lexical changes and Norwegianised orthographic conventions
30



Introduction
have been incorporated over time (see Jahr 2014). Both standards have
influenced one another over time, which was in part the consequence of
attempts to assimilate both into a common Samnorsk written standard in the
20th century in an attempt to end the “parallelingualism” of two ideologically
oppositional written standards (see Linn 2010b), although both Nynorsk and
Bokmål have remained separable written alternatives, each marked by several
decades of intense ideological debate surrounding what the Norwegian
language had been prior to Danish rule, how the modern language was to be
therefore differentiated from written Danish, and to what extent spoken
language across Norway’s vast dialectological landscape should be
incorporated into newer spelling conventions and lexical choices (Mæhlum &
Hårstad 2018; Sandøy 2018).
The organisations I have observed and written about before are
representative of the broader Nynorsk and dialect movement in Norway
known as målrørsla (the tongue/dialect/language-movement; see Nynorsk
paper in this thesis for a broader discussion about the meaning of mål). In
addition to promoting the use of Nynorsk and interests of Nynorsk-users, they
have also worked to help develop Norway’s pro-dialect use ideology (see
Almenningen 1992; Bucken-Knapp 2003; Brunstad 2017), and at times (and
as illustrated in one of the papers in this thesis), their language rights advocacy
has also extended to other social justice issues as a site of counter-cultural
discourse (see Puzey 2011), including the promotion and defence of other
minoritised language varieties, especially the Indigenous, non-Germanic
languages of Norway such as the Sámi languages and Kven.
My MScR dissertation was, for the most part, an annotated
ethnographic diary of observations and events that took place during my time
as a foreign-born “convert” to Nynorsk, being interviewed by the Norwegian
media about my decision to no longer write in Bokmål and becoming a
31



Introduction
member of Norsk Målungdom in addition to my local chapter, Studentmållaget
i Oslo (Student Language Organisation of Oslo, where I had also been elected
as a committee member in 2016).
At the time, my descriptive and chronological account of ethnographic
insights into Norsk Målungdom—having included participant-observation,
interviews, analysis of print/digital media and social media analysis—allowed
for the underscoring of language ideological orientations specific to young
Nynorsk activists. Feeding into a grounded theoretical understanding of
contemporary language activism in Norway, the following ideological and
attitudinal tropes were highlighted as part of an ethnographic thick
description of Nynorsk language activism particularly within Norsk
Målungdom, although insights were also drawn from my local chapter’s work,
as well as Noregs Mållag. Some of the points below may share thematic
similarities with one another or could alternatively be grouped into other
general points; given the relative timescale and subjective nature of this
observational fieldwork, each theme represents a rough sketch of the activities
and positionalities highlighted in my ethnographic research at the time:
1.

Educational institutions are venues for activist campaigning:
educational institutions overseen by the Norwegian state (schools,
university colleges and universities) are treated as arenas for
campaigning and outreach and member recruitment. As part of the
rhetorical strategy used to reach out to young people, Norsk
Målungdom expresses concern for the stability of current legislation
that affects both the use and teaching of Nynorsk in these
institutions, as well as the extent to which young people are made
aware of what current legislation says about their linguistic rights—
for example, students who move from a Nynorsk-using municipality
32



Introduction
to a university where Bokmål is the main language of teaching and
administration are made aware that they have the right to request
that their assessments are in Nynorsk (further discussion in
Thingnes 2020).
2.

Educational institutions are interpreted as sites of language
ideology: state institutions of all kinds are seen as responsible for
their adherence to legislation and their consideration for local
dialects and the two state-sanctioned orthographies of the
Norwegian

language.

The

particular

focus

on

educational

institutions is largely a result of Norsk Målungdom’s interaction with
young people, whereas institutions in general are considered as
forums that are instrumental in the spreading of language attitudes
about dialects, linguistic diversity, and the role of Nynorsk in civil
society (see Brunstad 2017).
3.

Discourse focuses on language “rights”: the focus in written texts
and in campaigning on language rights (språkrettar/språklege
rettar) is indicative of a language rights discourse, where the
organised efforts of Norsk Målungdom aim to highlight where rights
have been violated by any institution or individual due to an
emerging standard language ideology centred on the use of Bokmål
(see Kulbrandstad 2018). Violations are called out in the public
sphere, in press releases, and in social media, and campaigning aims
to encourage change in state-actor behaviour and the enforcement
of legislation mandating the use of Nynorsk.

4.

Nynorsk identity and stereotypes about Nynorsk are embraced:
Nynorsk activists can identify and (sarcastically) embrace the
stereotypes that are associated with Nynorsk users and dialect-users,
potentially disarming these stereotypes or subverting them, whilst
33



Introduction
at the same time holding high esteem for cultural traditions and
celebrations that bring the organisation and wider movement
together. Language activism in this sense is not just a medium to
express ideas and thoughts about language, but also an expression
of a specifically Nynorsk history, its society, and its culture (nynorsk
skriftkultur, cf. Grepstad 2006). Particular traditions and acts, such
as holding a yearly ceremony at the grave of Ivar Aasen on
Constitution Day (17 May) in Oslo, are particularly important to this
group identity.
5.

Political centralisation and municipal reform are viewed as
threats: Linguistic issues related to Nynorsk, dialects and other
minoritized language varieties in Norway are often associated with
larger constitutional issues such as the centralisation of the
Norwegian political system; this theme was particularly pertinent at
the time of writing, as not all proposed changes had been
implemented yet (Språklova, see Thingnes 2020: 4ff). Changes to
administrative municipal boundaries are received with high levels
of scepticism and concern, as officially Nynorsk-using municipalities
(which are often smaller in population) are made to join up with
majority

Bokmål/“neutral”

municipalities,

changing

the

sociolinguistic dynamic and institutional mandate to use Nynorsk in
signage and official communications. The Nynorsk community had
been also sceptical of Norwegian membership of the European
Economic Community and Union during national referendums on
the membership of both groups, having historically represented a
political counterculture against political disenfranchisement of rural
and peripheral communities (see Almenningen 1981).

34



Introduction
6.

Nynorsk & demographics; use of Bokmål and English is
increasing: Activists interpret Bokmål as carrying an inherent
prestige and high level of economic and cultural capital, unmatched
by any other language variety in Norway—save the growing role
and visibility of English in business, education, and mass media (cf.
Bakke & Teigen 2001; Buffetti 2020). The considerable use of
Bokmål in the majority of contexts where the Norwegian language
is used is associated with prevailing negative attitudes toward
Nynorsk, especially in urban centres and national press.

7.

Political parties are lobbied, and policy proposals are responded
to: Activists work where they can with political parties and advocacy
coalitions where a common interest in language and language policy
is discovered (see Nynorsk paper for an illustration). Both Noregs
Mållag and Norsk Målungdom engage in national and local
discourses via both traditional and social media and urge
sympathisers to engage, vote and campaign accordingly. The state
and its institutions are understood to be the largest forums for active
political change in favour of the linguistic goals of Nynorsk activism,
and activists do not see themselves as separate from evolving
political events.

8.

Nynorsk activism is able to engage in linguistic solidarity
coalitions: Nynorsk activists often work to show their support and
solidarity with other groups and peoples considered to be
marginalised and minoritized, both in Norway and internationally
(see Nynorsk paper in this thesis for an illustration). The core values
of promoting diversity and defending against the marginalisation of
minorities are concerns and objects seen in tandem with more
general linguistic attitudes and ideologies.
35



Introduction
1.1.3. Extended cases: Catalan and Scots

Following on from this work on Nynorsk and the wider målrørsla, the original
intention of this project was to embark on comparative, extended case studies
that examined organised language activism in Catalonia and Scotland. There
were various reasons at the time to support a comparative assessment of
Nynorsk, Catalan, and Scots language activism as my doctoral project, not
least that I had long desired the opportunity to incorporate Catalan into my
academic work five years after having studied the language as an
undergraduate, and also the energy and activity surrounding the Scots
language following Scotland’s 2011 national census and the 2014 referendum
on Scottish independence.
From a language policy and planning perspective, all three of these
language varieties exist in domain-specific sociolinguistic conflicts with
dominant acrolects: Norwegian Bokmål, Castilian Spanish, and Scottish
Standard English. Set in three western European geopolitical contexts, all
three minority languages examined in my project were also associated with
language activist organisations, and I had set out to make comparative
observations of Noregs Mållag with Plataforma per la llengua catalana
(Platform for the Catalan Language, a major non-governmental Catalan
language advocacy organisation; see Marco i Palau 2017; Dowling 2018) and
the Scots Leid Associe (Scots Language Society, a comparatively smaller and
less influential organisation, although known for its promotion of the Lallans
literary standard; see McClure 1980; 2000). The sociopolitical realities in all
three of these sites are clearly different, with Norway being a fully
independent nation-state after several centuries of union with either Denmark
or Sweden, Scotland being a devolved nation in a unitary state with an
increasingly more influential body of voters seeking independence, and
Catalonia being a Spanish autonomous community and “nationality” (but not
36



Introduction
“nation”, according to Spain’s constitution; see Mar-Molinero 2000;
Guibernau 2003) with a fervent nationalist movement.
Focus would have to be limited where possible; the organisations in
Catalonia and Scotland would have to be examined with the proviso that
Catalan and Scots are supported and used at varying levels and by different
political communities when compared against what I had learned from several
years of ethnographic study of the Nynorsk movement. Other factors would
need to be accounted for, such as the reality of Scots not being a standardised
language variety, also with related Ulster-Scots in the north of the island of
Ireland (see Crowley 2006), Norwegian being a polynomic language with
markedly diverse dialects, and Catalan itself being used not just in Catalonia,
but in the Valencian Country (as “Valencian”; see Vila, Lasagabaster, &
Ramallo 2017), the Balearic Islands, Andorra, and the city of L'Alguer on
Sardinia in Italy. With these issues in mind, the thesis was to propose an
informed research framework for language activism in response to the lack of
any other theoretical, sociolinguistic approach to interpreting the social action
and tangible policy achievements of language activist organisations in a
European context in the 21st century. The aims of this project were to highlight
commonalities between the three—given comparable aspects of the contested
status and prestige of Catalan, Nynorsk, and Scots, as well as all three being
the sites of nationalist discourse—where my work would ultimately contribute
to a broad descriptive analysis. This project was to examine three language
varieties that are deeply integrated into current national debates, utilising an
emergent ethnographic research methodology, presenting findings not just
relevant for sociolinguists but also other practitioners interested in active
social debates about language.

37



Introduction
1.1.4. Original aims and revised research trajectory

In my original proposal for this thesis, I had set out to examine cases of
language activism comparatively, extending my linguistic ethnographic
research on Norwegian Nynorsk to Catalan and Scots as explained above. The
overarching research question in particular was an attempt to use a descriptive
comparison of three western European sites of study to propose a general
conceptual understanding of language activism within sociolinguistic theory:
To what extent can a (macro)sociolinguistic framework to research
language activism be developed, based on a comparative analysis of
language activism in Catalonia, Norway, and Scotland?
In order to answer this main question, this thesis would have then
presented chapters addressing the following objectives:
Identify commonalities between the three cases
Identify main actors within activist communities of practice
Explain who language activists are within each case
Explain how identified language activist organisations operate
Explain how sociopolitical context informs activism
Explain how activism is portrayed in media and public discourse
With the working title Language Leagues, Platforms and Societies, I had
planned originally to orbit my research around three main identifiable
organisations within each of the case studies; namely, Noregs Mållag,
Plataforma per la llengua catalana, and the Scots Leid Associe, although these
sites were by no means interpreted as fully exhaustive of language activism in
each context. This project was altogether interrupted in March 2020 due to a
38



Introduction
global pandemic; before we entered a period where were no longer able to
conduct in-person research, I had only able to conclude the first set of semistructured interviews in each of my case-studies, I had limited fieldnotes from
a select few sites in each context, and all other international travel plans had
to be shelved. Consequently, as opposed to writing a comparative monograph,
this shorter article-based thesis allows me to still present research on each of
my cases, but the comparative angle to my work has been de-emphasised. Each
paper consequently delves into broader and open-ended meta-sociolinguistic
discussions about language activism itself.
Over the course of these three papers, I build on the concept of language
activism

as

inherently

representative

of

specific

cases

of

speaker

participation—or intervention—in metadiscourse, although the reader should
pay attention to the fact that this springboard for discussion is not oriented
around traditional language policy and planning frameworks specifically. That
is to say that my work does not talk directly about legislation, formal policy
texts or analysis of institutions and the efficacy of their work, nor does it make
any attempt to formalise its analysis of language activism. There are various
valid approaches to research where language policy can be conceptualised in
wider terms; policy may not need necessarily to be codified; we can refer to
common ideological stances on language shared by a community. For
example, we can speak of “declared” policies (see Shohamy 2006) or operate
within a framework which views policy “as ideology” (see Spolsky 2004), or
alternatively talk about “perceived” language policy (see Bonacina-Pugh
2012). However, such framings still lend themselves to a relative dialectic of
authority and either symbolic or imagined “top-down” pressure, whereas I
have attempted to engage in the complementary “sociocultural” approach
grounded in other studies to examine language activism within a linguistic
anthropological framework focused principally on the capacity of speaker
39



Introduction
agency (see Kroskrity 2008; Hornberger & Johnson 2011: 284-5; Ahearn
2017: 292). This is in order to not formalise activism or the role of language
activists explicitly in relation to perceived authority or institutions of the state,
but rather examine case-studies as participative sites of reinterpretation and
renegotiation of language ideology through the symbiotic construction of
metadiscourse within broader cultural narratives.
The theoretical persuasion of my work is in part influenced by the
approach taken in David Karlander’s thesis on metadiscourses concerning the
Elfdalian/Övdalsk language of Sweden, whose papers “align with a linguistic
anthropological interest in the linguistic properties of social practice” (2017:
5) and are concentrated on discourse in relation to semiotic legitimation, how
language-use including statements about language become meaningful within
symbolic regimes, and perspectives on language are numerous and in constant
flux. Language activism is therefore conceptualised in all three papers in my
thesis within a “multiperspectival” account of language-use which does not
just examine language ideology as a process, but how it is also embedded in
cultural practice (ibid.: 57).

1.2.

Fieldwork and methodologies

Data collection procedures and analytical methods are described in each of the
papers. However, as each paper can be read as a standalone piece of work, I
should stress that they represent three distinct fragments of a much wider
body of ethnographic fieldwork; several interview transcripts as well as
insights from many pages of ethnographic notes do not feature at all in the
research presented here, and they shall have to wait for future publications.
In order to frame my papers as products of the same research trajectory, I offer
here a holistic description of my ethnographic research, the qualitative and
40



Introduction
discourse-oriented methods involved, as well as a brief discussion of the
metapragmatic analytical lens used across all three studies.
With my choice of methods and approach to analysis, I have for the most
part chosen a critical sociolinguistic stance in my research, meaning that I
“[take] a step away – or perhaps a step forward – from ‘merely’ descriptive
approaches to language research [and instead] challenge the idea of
objectivist sociolinguistic research” (Pietikäinen 2016: 264). In particular, the
use of a critical sociolinguistic research approach when researching language,
social context and discourse may allow the researcher to understand “why
sociolinguistic phenomena are the way they are at the local level, with due
regard to knowledge that might be a manifestation of a local ontology or
epistemology of language or an instantiation of idiosyncratic knowledge
[about language]” (Albury 2017: 4). In brief, I use linguistic ethnographic
fieldwork and content analyses under a metapragmatic analytical lens.

1.2.1. Observing sites of social action: linguistic ethnography

As a research method grounded in anthropological tradition, ethnography is
by both practice and application the simultaneous observation of, and
participation in, a site of cultural behaviour, and then presenting an informed
account. Statements that originate out of ethnographic fieldwork are not
asserted from an objective standpoint but are meant to formulate observations
that relate to wider theoretical understanding of a given cultural phenomenon.
More specifically, ethnographic work is subjective not just on the grounds that
it is grounded in the subjective “gaze” of the researcher as a participantobserver in a given context, but that it also concentrates on those other subjects
(Gal & Irvine 2019: 169); in other words, people. Ethnography is therefore an
account of subjectivities related to cultural practice, including the use of
41



Introduction
language, discourses about language, and the treatment of language as a
cultural object and discursive point of reference over time.
All content that is collected as part of an ethnographic study has the
potential to be rich and substantive under an analytical lens, but this first
depends on the willingness to participate of the researcher, and then the
extent to which they are both involved and able to interpret the participative
role of others; this takes considerable time, and the gaze of the researcher may
be considerably restricted to this end, although ethnography is by definition
an “open-ended” approach to social scientific research (Berg 2016: 4).
Anthropologist Michael Agar describes ethnography as such:
In ethnography […], you learn something (‘collect some data’), then
you try to make sense out of it (‘analysis’), then you go back and see
if the interpretation makes sense in light of new experience (‘collect
more data’), then you refine your interpretation (‘more analysis’),
and so on. The process is dialectic, not linear. Such a simple
statement, so important in capturing a key aspect of doing
ethnography. (1980: 9)
Within contemporary sociolinguistic research, linguistic ethnography
has proven its utility in studies which examine linguistic variation and social
meaning by including localised, subjective perspectives and examinations of
interspeaker relationships from the stance of an informed outsider. With
regard to interpreting the dynamics of language ideology, the implementation
of linguistic ethnographic methods across sociolinguistic studies “shifts the
focus from a ‘top-down’ to a ‘bottom-up’ perspective of the social structures in
which language exists, [and …] it is possible to develop a more nuanced
understanding of how language functions as a constituent part of social
42



Introduction
differentiation and identity, rather than as an identity, rather than as a
reflection of macro-social categories” (Lawson 2014: 202). A greater focus on
the networks of “social information [or the] behaviours of speakers” is
considered through ethnographic work and has been implemented in
contemporary sociolinguistic research where before variationist studies had
“[made] little if any reference” to it (Milroy & Gordon 2003: 8). As a result, a
linguistic ethnography altogether is a theoretically informed approach to
observe, speculate, and hypothesise about the performativity and situated
context of language-use in daily life.
Whilst subjective, and only able to present a snapshot of a given context
from the single perspective of a researcher, ethnography forms part of a
diverse body of qualitative social scientific research methods that produces
“thick descriptions” and grounded accounts of behaviour which together
generate further hypotheses that can be trialled and tested through other
methods (Tusting, Nikolaidou & Hållsten 2018: 10)—to an extent, linguistic
ethnography is one method which is able to complement the research
outcomes and feed into various sociolinguistic insights:
Den språkvetenskapliga etnografin delar interaktionsparadigmets
intresse för handlingar, men vidgår kontexten kring dessa. Man vill
se sammanhäng genom att situationer binds ihop till kulturella
mönster: till praktiker. I detta perspektiv blir det också naturligt att
intressera sig för båda texter och samtal.
[Linguistic ethnography shares the interactionalist paradigm's
interest in actions, but it considers the context surrounding them.
We want to see this context emerge when situations are linked and
become cultural patterns: as practices. From this perspective, it also

43



Introduction
becomes natural to become interested in both texts and
conversation.] (Karlsson 2016: 126)
However, as with all research methods, there are limitations to the
epistemological scope of linguistic ethnography, both practical and
theoretical. Indeed, some ethnographers appear at times to be quite selfdeprecative due to how the nature of this research method may be received
by the rest of the academic community; ethnography has been described as “a
wonderful excuse for having an adventurous good time while operating under
the pretext of doing serious intellectual work” (van Maanen 1995: 2) on
account of the long periods of time required to collect and synthesise data in
often faraway destinations, or “messy and chaotic” (Copland & Creese 2015:
9) by virtue of it collecting broad, qualitative data sets, with no specified
system of coding (it can be done by hand annotation of jottings, using post-it
notes and sketching hand-drawn diagrams, done digitally with contemporary
software, or a mix of various alternatives; see McCarty 2015). Nevertheless,
such self-aware acceptance of the reality of language and social life
demonstrates that a close-up study of the intricacies of linguistic behaviour
will necessarily illustrate complexity with rich data presented from the
subjective perspective of a researcher. Regardless: ethnography is a highly
suitable research method within critical approaches to sociolinguistic work.
Importantly, it does not take an essentialist perspective on linguistic analysis
and is designed to be an account of a highly dynamic and multisided
phenomenon (cf. Wodak & Savski 2018: 95-6). This is advantageous if we are
critiquing the use of an equally messy and chaotic term like “language
activism” with its many iterations and interpretations.
The use of linguistic ethnography in various sociolinguistic studies has
also been referred to as part of a wider participatory “ethnographic turn”
44



Introduction
(Bodó et al. 2022: 11); as with other social sciences, sociolinguistic fieldwork
occurs often in sites and contexts that are heavily localised, and positivist
research traditions have often fostered approaches to fieldwork where
researchers need maintain some form of perceived or artificially maintained
distance between themselves and their objects/subjects of research. However,
in doing so, this also restricts access to spaces and to other sites of knowledge
and practices, and there have been consequent attempts to re-jig the research
dynamic using participatory, observational research models such as linguistic
ethnography. Related research domains also include “Citizen Sociolinguistics”
(see Rymes & Leone 2014), where participation within a research context
between both members of the academy and members of the project are valued
and sets the scene for considering all users of language to be experts in their
own communities. Situated ethnographic research requires us therefore to
both observe language-use and participate as language-users simultaneously,
and this is one way in which concepts and long-held definitions can be
effectively critiqued by adding further nuance from the field where access to
a research site is up-close, subjective, but also rich in data and different
perspectives; in fact, where traditional definitions and concepts in
sociolinguistic research may have emerged from studies of other data from
specific contexts, ethnographic research functions as one reflexive approach
to challenge claims that seem universalistic (Trudgill 2018).
Another aspect of ethnographic research is that it does not set out to
reach definite conclusions. Rather than directly evaluating a hypothesis, the
end-product of a linguistic ethnography is a “hypothesis-generating”
description of highly context-dependent situations which are constantly
fluctuating (Packer 2018: 1); linguistic ethnography to this extent engages in
post-structuralist critiques of hitherto essentialised definitions and categories
(Creese 2008). Agar writes accordingly:
45



Introduction

Ethnography is a different sort of research process from hypothesistesting. From my viewpoint, ethnography is the more general
process of understanding another human group; hypothesis-testing
is a minor, though potentially significant part of that process. (1980:
71)
From an ethnographic standpoint, no language nor speaker is a “unified,
singular and stable” conceptualisation (Gilmore 2011: 122). “Language”, like
“nation” or various other labels, is an essentialised idea that emerges from
settings where we try to delineate phenomena from one another. Ethnography
breaks down presuppositions, and positions us as situated social actors in
dynamic and “fundamentally political” contexts (Jaffe 2007: 57).

1.2.2. Metadiscourses, metalanguage, and metapragmatic analysis

I engage with a linguistic anthropological approach to language-aboutlanguage (metalanguage), specifically where focus is not just on explicit
statements about language (e.g., formal language policy texts or public
language debates in the media)—rather, metalanguage exists within broader
metapragmatic frameworks (where metalanguage becomes meaningful in
context) and is deeply embedded within various cultural practices:
To speak about metapragmatics, then, is to speak about
linguistically interested exchanges, in which numerous socially
positioned visions of language and social life grapple with each
other. (Karlander 2017: 28)

46



Introduction
As such, the performativity of language necessitates the participation of
language-users in discourse where metalanguage is part of the nonpropositional communicative context. This analytical approach is grounded in
the principle that language ideology is effectively metadiscourse, where
“language embodies ideology [… and] therefore, various actors may engage
in regulating, maintaining and/or resisting language policies, uses and
choices” (Selvi 2022: 82-3), or put another way:
To comment on languages, or to describe them, or recommend
policy with respect to them, is to engage in a metadiscourse, a
reflexive activity that is at once a practice and a commentary upon
that practice, within a realm of alternative possibilities. (Irvine &
Gal 2019: 1)
This analytical position allows us further to examine a sociolinguistic
context as a site of subjects, of individuals who are situated in diverse contexts
amongst other participating individuals, where the social contexts themselves
are both products of historical events and are sites of the further generation
and reproduction of (language) ideological stances. The ethnographic
fieldwork presented in this research is complemented by semi-structured
interviews and content analysis of various media (press statements, social
media activity, pamphlets, newsletters etc.); content analyses of my dataset
and semi-structured interviews are more than just a general qualitative
reading of these texts, but a “systematic exploration” of the content
(Krippendorff 2004: 16-17), identifying how argumentative stances are
exhibited in relation to one another, and how ideological orientations are
presented across different sites of metadiscourse.

47



Introduction
As is repeatedly demonstrated over the course of all three papers in this
thesis, my analytical focus is on the linguistic subject—the user of language—
as a stakeholder in ideological discourse (Errington 2003). “Individuals rely
on metalinguistic strategies to clarify what they mean” (Bridges 2019: 39-40),
and in turn, language ideology becomes “locally and historically” framed
within linguistic behaviour and other cultural practices (Gal & Irvine 2019: 2).
Our use of language, and our statements about language, are inherent
“positioned and partial visions of the world” (ibid.), and this theoretical
perspective enables us to demonstrate how language practices are associated
with the meaning-making networks that exist within varying social contexts.
The reader may note that this perspective is related to the concept of
indexicality, where language-use is clearly not just about communicating
propositions, but also “[evokes] a social or cultural frame” (Ljosland 2014:
403). Language-use, including statements about language, bears specific
meanings and is embedded in ever-evolving value systems. Consequently, my
analytical approach does not examine language as an external system where
speakers are not aware of the implications of their language-use. The
relationship between metapragmatics and indexicality depends on the
principle that “the ways speakers use language can ascribe certain social roles
upon them”, indicating perceived categories of membership or ideological
stances in social context (Bridges 2019: 45).

1.3.

Data collection (September 2019-March 2020)

As explained, this project collects, analyses, and presents linguistic
ethnographic data alongside semi-structured interviews and content analyses
of other multimodal media including data from social media and the printed
press. These data are examined through metapragmatic analysis, and each of
48



Introduction
the three studies is a presentation of an evaluated case-study of language
activism in Catalonia, Norway, or Scotland.
Having used the 2018-19 academic year to undertake reading and
develop a schedule and framework for interviews and observational research,
data collection for this project as a whole commenced in September 2019 and
ended abruptly in March 2020. Data sourced from my 2018 MScR dissertation
is also cited in the Nynorsk paper, although newer data in the form of semistructured interviews in 2019 and citations from the press are examples of the
further research done to build on and consolidate my Norwegian research
trajectory until now. Therefore, all three papers in this thesis are written on
the basis of a multimodal, although mostly text-based, qualitative set of data
consisting of handwritten jottings, written-up fieldnotes, photographs, digital
screenshots, transcripts, and corresponding translations of twelve semistructured interviews.
At the core of this linguistic ethnographic fieldwork are handwritten
jottings which are an attempt to make a record of various interactions and
statements within an interactional setting, in addition to making any notes or
comments that the researcher believes are relevant or give further detail to a
specific interaction (Papen 2020). Jottings are, at their most basic form,
unstructured and can be written in multiple ways, as well as by hand, digitally,
or a mix of the two approaches. I opted for doing most of my handwritten
jottings in the same ring bound A5 notebook, making occasional use of
different coloured inks either to separate individual sessions of an event or to
specifically highlight an interaction or statement (see Figure 1).

49







Introduction
Fieldnotes themselves are the more formalised and structured form of
accounts which are based on jottings and are also able to bring in other data;
the use of diagrams, photographs or digital screenshots may be used as
illustration throughout a set of fieldnotes. Not all jottings were formally
written up as fieldnotes, as the limited focus for each of the papers as and
when they were written did not necessitate it. Where a thorough account of a
specific event was required, writing up fieldnotes as a chronological
commentary of events was useful in both the Catalan and Scots papers, as both
feature first-hand reports of public events, including the Premis Martí Gasull i
Roig in Barcelona, the No em canviïs la llengua event several days later, and
the 2020 Scots@ed event.

1.3.1. Coronavirus pandemic: ending data collection early

By the start of March 2020, all three research sites were represented to varying
degrees across my ethnographic jottings and interview recordings, although
the original research plan had envisaged further interviews and travel over the
summer.6 With travel restrictions enforced due to the rapid spread of the
Coronavirus globally, and decisions by university authorities to suspend field
research for staff and students, I had to end data collection much earlier than
was suitable for the original design of the project. As explained prior, the
proposal submitted for this thesis intended for a comparative ethnography
answering various research questions in order to draft a theoretical framework
for language activism, and with limited ethnographic research in Catalonia
(only lasting one week of travel to Barcelona) and few insights from the Scots
case (comprising the 2019 Scots Language Awards being involved in the

6

A summarised overview of the data collected until March 2020, including a timeline of
ethnographic observations, can be found in the Appendices (6.2).

53



Introduction
organisation of the 2020 Scots@ed symposium), it was no longer sustainable
for this doctorate to present fully comparative observations alongside my more
substantive ethnographic work in Norway.
Whilst it would have been possible to continue fieldwork virtually via
technologies that had gained considerable popularity during so-called
“lockdowns”, such as video conferencing software, and whereas it may have
been advantageous to even restart the project by examining language activism
with non-ethnographic methods which did not necessitate the use of
interviews or real-time in-person observations (for example, a study of
language activism via social media, as already mentioned), I had decided that
doing either would not be fully compatible specifically with the contextual
quality of the Nynorsk data that had been collected over several years until
this point; in other words, the nature of my research until this point was not
immediately “amenable to a shift to ethnography in virtual spaces” amongst
other factors (Kim et al. 2021: 3). The novel occurrence of a global pandemic
that fundamentally changed the world of work, education, and leisure also
affected the daily operations of the organisations I had wanted to investigate
further, such as Plataforma per la llengua and the Scots Leid Associe: both
organisations had transitioned to virtual events at various points between
2020 and 2021. I was minded instead to use what data had been gathered
until this point—which was by no means nothing, consisting of nearly eight
hours of interview recordings and over 130 pages of handwritten jottings—
and orient my papers around themes specific to each case-study instead of
performing a comparative analysis across all three.
Changing circumstances did also mean that this project was no longer
operating under a specific, overarching research question. Consequently, each
paper has approached the topic of language activism first and foremost
through an organic description of themes that were identified in every case54



Introduction
study, and this thesis’ introduction and the subsequent conclusions attempt to
draw together an open-ended theoretical discussion about the various insights
that have emerged from each site, and collectively form a theoretical
commentary on language activism as an area of study in sociolinguistics.
As is exemplified by this thesis and knowing how other colleagues have
had to work within these disrupting circumstances, I do not doubt that other
doctoral candidates around the world and across various disciplines will also
need to account in their writing for how the circumstances of 2020 have
affected their original research plans. In as much as it has become even more
important to talk about positionality in contemporary ethnographic work (see
Section 1.4), I am equally fine with being transparent about my own
circumstances as a researcher with a life-long mental health diagnosis; I am
comfortable with disclosing that I took health leave for three months over the
summer of 2020 due to the exacerbating circumstances of lockdowns and
isolation at home in Edinburgh, deciding to spend time away with my family
in High Wycombe. At this point I had not yet started with the transcription of
my semi-structured interviews, yet I was fortunate to receive financial support
from my funding body which was put towards the transcription of all twelve
interviews in their original languages by professional transcribers. I was able
to use some of my time away to look through transcripts, make any necessary
corrections, and translate the Norwegian interviews into Nynorsk, as they had
been delivered to me in Bokmål; I will admit that this was an oddly pleasurable
experience, despite the many hours it also took to proof-read afterwards.
Towards the end of my time away, I had begun some work on drafting
the first article of this thesis, as the organisers of a conference I had presented
at in 2019 at the University of Stockholm offered me and several others the
opportunity to publish research findings in the Journal of Postcolonial
Linguistics in a special peer-reviewed issue in 2022. The reader will note that
55



Introduction
this paper centres on my very brief research period in Catalonia, and to present
ethnographic research that stems from only a week of observations feels
perhaps bizarre, given that ethnographic research is usually long-term
endeavour (cf. Pink & Morgan 2013). However, given the unique opportunity
to publish and build on the rich variety of data in both my interview transcripts
and notes that I was able to comb across during my time away is perhaps
illustrative of how the turn taken in my project design quickly became a
strategy that has helped reorient this thesis in a different direction.

1.3.2. Documents and photography

During my pre-pandemic fieldwork, I was able to add self-published
documents from Scots and Catalan organisations, such as flyers, schedules and
promotional materials to my already existing Noregs Mållag/Norsk Målungdom
collection; these documents were also available digitally, but when available
as physical copies I found it useful to take examples, which also proved
conducive to my analytical approach where I would use post-it notes or
highlighters when doing rudimentary coding of metalanguage (see Figure 4).

Figure 4:
Examples of pamphlets and badges produced by Noregs Mållag

56



Introduction
events that were open to the public such as the Premis Martí Gasull i Roig in
Barcelona or the Scots Language Awards in Glasgow (see Figures 5 and 6).

Figure 6:
La Llibreria Catalana wins the 2020 Premi Martí Gasull i Roig

I also took other photos where subjects were not present, although the
use of photography applies mostly to the Catalan and Nynorsk cases due to
the extent of my fieldwork up to the point where it had to stop. For the most
part, the use of photography is not a major factor in this doctoral research,
although what photographs I do have are mementos of the time I had to
undertake fieldwork and are valuable illustrations of my investigations prior
to the events of 2020 (see Figure 7).

58



Introduction

Figure 7:
Placards placed at the offices of Plataforma per la llengua catalana in Barcelona

1.3.3. Use of social media

In the Catalan and Nynorsk papers, social media are used specifically as
contextual explainers or additional illustrations of metalanguage, rather than
being a discreet site of fieldwork. Examining social media did not become an
explicit aim of my work; I have focused primarily on interviews and jottings
from observational settings.
Indeed, it could have been possible to gather data intentionally from
social media sites such as Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram, and likely would
have been a fruitful exercise too; various contemporary studies do examine
language-use in these sites, and photos and microblogging are novel and
dynamic multimodal sites rich in examples of situated discourse (for example
Dynel 2020). Furthermore, social media has offered various language
communities the opportunity to develop and evolve new communities of
59



Introduction
practice, especially where a language variety is minoritised or not as visible in
traditional media, “outside the control” of other authorities and power
structures (Hassanpour 2012: 68, see also Selvi 2022), altogether illustrative
of “bottom-up resistance” in the contemporary age (Nandi 2017: 41).

1.3.4. Interviews, transcripts, and translations

The principle aim of using interviews for this project was to supplement my
ethnographic observations (McCarty 2015). Semi-structured interviews were
used as non-exhaustive attempts to discuss events attended prior to the end of
my fieldwork with interested participants who volunteered their time and
were willing to take part. One underlying principle in the use of interviews in
qualitative research is to use this as data towards understanding and analysing
other observational fieldwork; to this end, these interviews are “[materials]
which [provide] good opportunities for interpretation and analysis”
(Fägerborg 2011: 85). It is important to stress that interviews of the kind used
in my research are necessarily open-ended and are able to diverge from any
set list of questions that the interviewer may originally set out to follow.7 It is
equally important to state that interviews in themselves are unlikely to be
enough as a comprehensive data set when examining wider phenomena, in as
far as they only illustrate limited and situated perspectives on a given topic;
interview work such as this is more-so part of how the researcher tries to
triangulate of data collection, rather than engage in a standalone exercise
where the number of possible individuals who could be interviewed is often
without limit, and the conversations that could be held could go on for as long
as either party is willing to sit down (ibid.: 93) These factors are still a relative

7

A list of possible questions taken into the semi-structured interviews can be found in the
Appendices (6.3)

60



Introduction
strength; I had intended to use interviews to initially discuss participants’
perspective on an event both of us had attended or of which they involved in
the organisation, which would then lead into a broader discussion about
activist organisations, their experiences with Catalan, Nynorsk or Scots, and
their conceptualisation of language activism.
Interview transcripts are consequently snapshots of explicit ideological
statements and are the result of a “joint production” between the interviewer
and participant (Schilling 2013: 108). Both parties engage in a site of
metadiscourse which in turn complements other “systematic participant
observation data” (Gilmore 2011: 125). As I resort primarily to ethnographic
observations and jottings recorded throughout, interviews are only an
additional part of my fieldwork rather than the sole focus of my analysis; focus
instead is on observational sites, where interviews are “situated discursive
practices” that draw on themes that provide other subjective perspectives on
a given phenomenon, and therefore further cultural knowledge and examples
of metalanguage (Pritzker & Perrino 2022: 137).
Interviews were undertaken in Catalan, Norwegian and English, with
the raw transcriptions being in Catalan, Nynorsk, and English (with Scots lexis
included where appropriate); as this is not a project engaging in conversation
analysis, transcripts are not significantly detailed, only accounting for laughter
or significant pauses.
The reader will note that the Catalan paper includes snippets from
interview transcripts that are not accompanied by their original Catalan source
text, being instead just English translations. This was done in order to meet
the word-limit for the Journal of Postcolonial Linguistics. In the Nynorsk paper,
all interview sections include both the original lines in Norwegian followed by
my English translation. My Scots interviews were not used for my Scots paper,
where I focus solely on the proceedings of the 2020 Scots@ed event.
61



Introduction
1.4.

Ethics and positionality

The papers presented in this thesis each examine a site of a minority language
discourse, and there are various concerns to account for due to the sensitivity
of observational research in close-contact settings, which do not just implicate
the researcher, but also those being observed who through their participation
“run the risk of becoming objects of scientific control” (Zienkowski 2016: 396).
The subjects involved in my research are observed in highly dynamic and
fluctuating contexts, and I have triangulated this with multimethod data
collection via semi-structures and content analysis (Fägerborg 2011).
This is my own research and is not part of any other scheme or funded
project. Besides my doctoral stipend and other awarded funding for living
costs and tuition fees, neither I nor any of my participants were in receipt of
funds for either writing up or participating as subjects in this project. My
doctoral stipend was awarded by the Carnegie Trust for the Universities of
Scotland, and I was also in receipt of mobility funding from the Norwegian
Government to spend my last three months at the University of Oslo, on the
grounds that a considerable portion of my work is centred on past Norwegian
fieldwork, and resources pertaining to Norwegian Nynorsk are accessible at
libraries and research institutions across Oslo.
As ethnographic fieldwork that also undertakes recorded interviews,
ethical approval was required from the Linguistics and English Language
Research Ethics Committee at the University of Edinburgh. Where informed
participation was required—for example, when recording an interview—all
participants were issued with information sheets and consent forms to sign
(see Appendices). Interview participants were allowed to keep the information
sheets if they so wished, which contained information about their right to
withdraw at any time before the submission of this thesis. These documents
were also translated into Catalan and Norwegian alongside the main English
62



Introduction
text for the Catalan and Norwegian interviews, and these translations were
proof-read by Catalan- and Norwegian-speaking staff at the University of
Edinburgh. Other sites of observation were events that were open to the
public, and whilst informed consent was not strictly needed prior to attending
due to the open nature of these sites, I decided to send information sheets in
postal letters to the various organisations whose events I had planned to
attend over the course of my doctoral research period. These letters contained
information about the research project, and how observational jottings would
be used, including relevant research questions. Contact information was also
provided in the event that organisation representatives wished to ask
questions; indeed, at one point, I received both e-mails and phone calls from
the international office of Plataforma per la llengua catalana, who themselves
were already familiar with researchers showing an interest in their
organisation.8 Naturally, not all of these organisations were visited in the end,
not least due to the constraints of the Coronavirus pandemic. The following
organisations were contacted in 2018:
Noregs Mållag (Norway)
Norsk Målungdom (Norway)
Òmnium Cultural (Catalonia)
Plataforma per la llengua catalana (Catalonia)
Scots Language Centre (Scotland)
Scots Leid Associe (Scotland)

8

University of Cambridge doctoral candidate Javier Moreno-Rivero was also in Barcelona
during the same week of 2020, visiting the organisation’s premises at the same time as me
on occasion; his forthcoming thesis also includes an examination of the operations of
Plataforma per la llengua catalana.

63



Introduction
The planning of semi-structured interviews was to be oriented around
events scheduled and organised either by these organisations or in
collaboration with them between September 2019 and August 2022; after
attending a public event such as the Scots Language Awards, volunteering
interview participants would be sought out either during the event or
afterwards after being contacted. Interviews were to take place at a time and
date that suited the participant and would usually be with an individual within
an organisation with a specific role as a full-time employee or someone elected
to a specific position. These interviews were to be held one-on-one rather than
as group panels or focus sessions. By virtue of the organisations having
determined roles and responsibilities, I had decided in my ethics approval
application that participants’ full anonymity may prove difficult to maintain
due to the nature of their work. Nevertheless, each interview consent form
gave participants the option to maintain full anonymity without having their
transcripts associated with their name and role. However, unless marked
otherwise, the form stipulated that transcripts would not anonymise the name
of the participant. At the time of submission, no participant has requested to
withdraw from the research presented in this thesis, nor to have their name
redacted from any of the interview transcripts.
An increasingly critical part in studies of this nature, it is also important
to discuss my own position within the sites I have observed, and how my
conduct and gaze have adapted to various research contexts and
circumstances over the course of my doctoral research. Sociolinguists are
people too, and the imagined divide between the academic expert and the
observed lay person is something that must be considered when reflecting over
how research is performed and scientific knowledge is then generated. In
research such as this, people become easily objectified without also
considering how this objectification is ultimately sketched out by another
64



Introduction
living person: the researcher themselves. Naturally, “our own interpretations
[should be] subject to analysis as well” (Rymes & Leone 2014: 32). Discourses
that language-users participate within, especially within the context of
language activism (embedded within wider social action and cultural
narratives) develop out of complex processes of attitudinal enregisterment
(Williams 2019: 308). In other words, social actors’ statements do not
represent one static perspective, and neither do social actors merely parrot
what others say. Social actors, and researchers included, represent “complex
repertoires of semiotic resources”, in the same way that talk about
individuals—about subjects—is a conscious act of broadcasting a personally
negotiated attitudinal view in tandem with the themes we discover in the talk
of others (ibid.). Whilst other linguists might be able to treat individual
structural patterns as artefacts or objects in their own right, direct
participatory involvement in sites of cultural practices is not the same style of
work. By engaging in academic research on social action, researchers ought to
be aware of their role as people with the ability to act upon impulse, bias, and
political sympathies; these need accounted for:
We invest our selves emotionally in particular subject positions and
projects because these positions and projects provide social value(s)
as well as various forms of capital for the self. […]. Selves are never
mere binary entities even though some ideological discourses
suggest exactly this. (Zienkowski 2016: 268)
One way to account for these is to engage in exercises such as
autoethnographic reflection. I am now 27, I am a cisgender man, and I am
white with northern European ancestry and citizenship from both the UK and
Poland; however, due to my grandfather not passing down the Polish language
65



Introduction
to his own family after settling in England in the post-war years, British English
is my only family language, and I was raised for most of my childhood in High
Wycombe, in a majority English-speaking community. Whilst I did complete
French and German GCSEs and A-levels at an all-boys state grammar school,
I had never considered that I had learned a language fully until I moved to
Edinburgh in 2013 to start a degree in Norwegian.
First, my doctoral case-studies are representative of both my own
linguistic background and the connections I have been able to develop as
someone in their early twenties and involved in party politics at home now in
Scotland. Whilst I completed a degree in Scandinavian Studies and Linguistics
in 2017, specialising in Norwegian, I am also a competent speaker of Catalan,
having taken courses in this language in my first year of undergraduate study.
My status as a Catalan speaker is also rather unusual, as I do not speak
Castilian Spanish to the same level and have never studied it formally (bar one
year of basic classes in my first year of high school).
Although I took courses in Catalan out of general curiosity in 2013,
when in Catalonia I make active attempts to use Catalan in everyday
transactions and avoid using English and Castilian, practising where I can
despite my appearance as someone from outside the Mediterranean. My
continued use of Catalan has been spurred on due to various political activities
associated with the independence movement in Scotland, and my
participation in events advocating the self-determination of the people of
Catalonia. In October 2017, I was one of several international visitors who
were invited by the devolved government of Catalonia (Generalitat de
Catalunya) to observe its 1 October independence referendum—declared
illegal and illegitimate by the Spanish state—and in the capacity as an
interpreter for a group of Scottish politicians during and in the events prior, I
like many others became witness to scenes of unfathomable police brutality,
66



Introduction
smashed glass windows and the blood of voters on the floor outside the polling
station in Sant Julià de Ramis, and having members of the public come up to
me in Girona later that day to show me the bruises received due to the impact
of rubber batons when attempting to prevent the confiscation of ballot boxes;
these experiences have, if anything, strengthened my own personal sympathy
with people who advocate for the people of Catalonia to determine who
governs them and where political sovereignty should lie.
As Norwegian is a much smaller language in terms of its number of
speakers, with an even smaller Nynorsk-using population, alongside my
political sympathies is my wish to see the Catalan language be “normalised”
(see discussion of normalització in Catalan paper) where Catalan speakers do
not have to see the language as subsidiary to Castilian, or as a language that
has no utility or status beyond the sub-national limits of Catalonia, the
Valencian Country, and the Balearic Islands—where Catalan is used the most.
Granted, Andorra (a mountainous microstate stuck in-between Spain and
France) is the only country in Europe that uses Catalan at an official, statewide level, yet their lack of European Union membership (which would
otherwise make Catalan an official language of the EU by default), and
comparatively miniscule size would seem to prevent increased visibility of
Catalan at any international level. Consequently, there is considerable overlap
between the self-determination movement in Catalonia and pro-Catalan
language advocacy, and it is perhaps natural that I am in favour of both of
these as they are, to a certain extent, two sides of the same coin; this theme
came up in all three of my Catalan language interviews, although I do not
bring this up explicitly in my Catalan paper (further discussion is in Cetrà 2019
and Byrne 2020).
At the same time, my experiences with Norwegian, and more
specifically making the switch from Bokmål to Nynorsk during my
67



Introduction
undergraduate exchange year in Oslo, have influenced my most inner feelings
about what we mean by the term “language” and how language attitudes are
legitimised in the public sphere. Not only has this been relevant in terms of
my observations and the notes taken in the field, but also in how I have
approached transcription and translation of data. My Norwegian participants
in particular all speak various dialects, as is the norm, although what they say
is represented in the same form of Nynorsk where I have chosen to be
consistent with my choice of infinitive endings, amongst other stylistic
features. It would have been possible to transcribe the interviews with regard
to participants’ dialects (replacing <korleis> with Gunnhild Skjold’s Tromsødialect equivalent of <korsn/korsen>, or writing <i> instead of <eg> when
transcribing Anna Rekdal’s dialect from Møre og Romsdal), although what was
critical when finishing the transcriptions was not so much the linguistic
features of their speech, but rather the actual content of what they said; a
similar quandary concerning positionality, reflexivity and approaches to
transcription of polynomic language varieties was also taken up in Diana
Camps’ doctorate on Limburgish (see 2018: 99).
Whereas the Catalan data did not require the same level of treatment,
my conscious effort to translate the outsourced transcripts to from Bokmål to
Nynorsk was also important for me in terms of the voice I wanted to have in
my writing, although doing so was clearly unnecessary; my participants were
speaking Norwegian with me, and both Bokmål and Nynorsk are valid forms
of written Norwegian, although importantly, Nynorsk is my form of
Norwegian, and the form of Norwegian used by many of my close friends in
Norway. It would feel inauthentic to write out tracts of Norwegian
conversation in my own doctorate if it were not in Nynorsk. However, my
Scots work is quite contrastive in comparison to my Nynorsk and Catalan
work. The close intelligibility between the vernacular speech varieties of
68



Introduction
Scotland (be it Broad Scots or closer to a variety of Scottish Standard English)
and my own English, as well as my own background as someone born and
raised in England, creates something of a mental block when it comes to my
own use of Scots as a language in its own right. The Scottish sites I have
documented are predominantly focused on my role as a foreign-born observer,
at least, more than as a direct participant. That being said, halfway through
this doctorate, I was elected to the committee of the recently established Oor
Vyce organisation which is actively working alongside Scottish politicians and
other civil society leaders to establish a Scots language board and put forward
draft legislation for the Scots language akin to what is currently in place for
Scottish Gaelic; other members of the committee also include foreign-born
individuals, as well as linguists and other academics. However, unlike
Norwegian and Catalan, Scots is not a language I have studied at any formal
level, and whilst I have made occasional attempts to write in Scots on social
media, it is not a language that I would argue I have within my own personal
linguistic repertoire; I could say the same for Swedish, Danish and Castilian in
as far as they are accessible to me, but not languages I profess actual
competence in.
Likewise, my access to the case-studies presented in these papers is the
result of the sort of connections I have been able to build over time. It is by
virtue of being at a Scottish university in the national capital, with active
membership of a political party and being an office bearer in its executive, that
I do not just have access on social media and in person to people within Scots
activist circles, but also that I have been able to highlight my background in
Norwegian, which has often piqued the interest of Scots advocates due to the
sociolinguistic and historical linguistic parallels between Scots and the

69



Introduction
Scandinavian languages (see Ljosland 2021).9 Had I not been active in the
2014 Yes campaign, and were I not a member of a party that supports the
political self-determination of both Scotland and Catalonia, it may have been
harder to seek out a conversation with people like English-born Matthew Tree;
before my recorded interview with him on Catalan activism even began, he
appeared especially interested in wanting to speak about politics back in
Scotland and my own upbringing in England. My connection with Catalan
politics continues even to this day, as I was invited along to an event with
Assemblea Nacional Catalana only in April this year, attending a proindependence rally in Vic and later tagging along with the organisation’s
president to meet with a retired teacher who was on a hunger strike in protest
against the Spanish state’s imposition of a 25% requirement on Castilian use
in Catalan public schools; the press also remarked on my status as a doctoral
candidate in linguistics in a report of the visit.10
My background at times does also act as a hindrance: it is much harder
to use Catalan as a foreigner, not least due to the complex dynamics of
Catalan-Castilian diglossia in Catalonia (see Alarcón & Garzón 2013), but also
due to my appearance as someone from northern Europe—my “phenotype”,
to paraphrase Matthew Tree’s words in the Catalan article—in addition to my
Polish name. The opposite is so in Norway, where unless I insist on using
English, I can always use Norwegian. My role as part-time Lecturer in
Norwegian at University College London also adds aspects of legitimacy and
expertise to my speakership, as well as my specialism and use of Nynorsk. In
the case of Scots, I have consistently used English in my research there but
often find myself wondering how my own use of my south-eastern English

9

At the time of writing, I am the elected co-convenor of the Council of the Scottish Green
Party, serving a term of two years (2021-23).
10
https://www.larepublica.cat/noticies/politica/la-vaga-de-fam-de-jaume-sastre-acullelisenda-paluzie-i-altres-carrecs-internacionals-de-lanc/ (accessed 26 July 2022)

70



Introduction
accent impacts the willingness of others in a given space to use their Scots. My
interview with Billy Kay is case-in-point: whilst the consent forms he signed
indicated that Scots could be used in the recording, our conversation was in
standard English.
Regardless, each of the case-studies presented as article manuscripts
over the next three chapters will illustrate that I have been able to build both
rapport and access with various social actors in order to gather data necessary
to produce doctoral research in these three individual contexts, despite the
circumstances that effectively changed this project into something different
from its original design. However, the quality of this data and the quantity of
data I have been able to extract from each field-site will differ since I have
entered each one with a different approach, hindered or helped by either my
academic background, ethnicity, linguistic competence, or political activity. To
that end, it is worth repeating and underscoring that each study can be read
as a standalone piece, that I have not entered the field for each paper with the
same level and quality of access and rapport; each study has been approached
with various social inroads I have gathered over time, each being slightly
different in quality and scope.
The papers that follow are the result of a disrupted research journey,
and thus reassemble the objectives and focus of the original research project
towards a broader discussion of language activism with a focus on both the
metadiscourses that inform it, and the individuals who are present across the
field; not the route I intended to follow, but a route to follow, nonetheless.
They are a product of subjective observations within a very short period, and
long conversations with an incomplete set of individuals—I would have gladly
conducted more interviews and arranged further trips for observational
research, but alas—however, as with all ethnographic work, what I have
written builds on past work and may well inspire whatever may come next.
71



No em canviïs la llengua!
2.1.

Introduction: language activism in a non-native context

This article investigates the emergence of a novel case of Catalan language
activism, characterised by “non-native” participation in sociolinguistic
discourse. The notion of language activism as a domain for “non-natives” is
surprising: language activism/advocacy is often portrayed in sociolinguistics
and linguistic anthropology as action specific to an indigenous population
(Makoni & Criss 2017), or an assertion of ethnic identity (Dołowy-Rybińska
2018). However, cultural affiliations can be discursively performed (PerezMilans & Soto 2016; Zienkowski 2016), and language activism could be better
interpreted fluidly as acts of participative “linguistic citizenship” (Stroud &
Heugh 2014; De Korne forthcoming) – not explicitly what some “significant
participants in language management” do (Spolsky 2009: 204). The
implications of this stance give nuance to theoretical approaches to
researching of speaker identities and linguistic narratives (Kymlicka 2001;
Edwards 2006; Johnson & Ricento 2013).
This article presents an informed observation of a group called No em
canviïs la llengua (don’t change my language), an example of language
activism related to Catalan “new speakers” (Pujolar & Puigdevall 2015; Pujolar
2020)13. These individuals are embedded in a multilingual context where use
of the Catalan language has been “de-ethnicised” and no longer related to a
“native” Catalan identity (Pujolar & Gonzàlez 2013). However, Catalan
remains associated with “status and social promotion” (Alarcón & Garzón
2013: 95) and tropes of a middle-class identity (Philips 2004; Codó 2018). No
em canviïs la llengua is an example of where some new speakers have become

13

Both “new speaker” and “non-native” may be disputed by non-spoken language research,
the theoretical adequacy of “nativeness” as a concept, and connotations of “new speaker”
in a globalised world. I use these terms interchangeably and am conscious of the
implications.

84



No em canviïs la llengua!
explicit advocates for the language. Their discourse encourages others to
engage with the view that those who “change language” to Castilian are
discouraging “participation” and “social cohesion”, hindering the ideological
objective of instituting Catalan as a “common language” in popular
consciousness. Operating as a voluntary collective, this group uses social
media and holds casual, infrequent public events. This contrasts with the
language activism of professional linguistic and cultural organisations for
Catalan speakers such as Plataforma per la llengua catalana and Òmnium
Cultural (Deulonder Camins 2015; Marco Palau 2017).
The research objective of this article is to present initial observations of
No em canviïs la llengua as an informal collective of activists characterised by
their “non-native” identity. My data are drawn from a preliminary fieldwork
visit to Barcelona in February 2020. Before presenting findings, I contextualise
the sociolinguistic context of Catalonia, identify ideological themes in current
language policy and other language activist groups, summarise the events
surrounding my fieldwork, and explain my methods, positionality, and
analytical framework.

2.2.

Catalan: sociolinguistic context

Catalan is a Romance language with varying status in four countries (Vila
2013) – Andorra, Spain, France, and Italy (in Alguer, Sardinia). The number
of Catalan users is estimated at roughly ten million (Joan i Marí 2002), with
the majority of living in Spain – and most notably in the Autonomous
Community of Catalonia, where 95% of the population understands the
language, 73% report a speaking ability, and 35% claim it as their habitual
language (Codó & Garrido 2010).
Catalan and Castilian are co-official languages in Catalonia, the
Valencian Country (where the language is known as Valencian) and the
85



No em canviïs la llengua!
Balearic Islands. In recent history, Catalan-speaking Spain experienced
immense political and demographic shift under the fascist dictatorship of
Francisco Franco, whose language policies led to successive generations of
other Spaniards – who had no prior knowledge of the Catalan language –
settling in the more affluent Catalan-speaking regions of Spain in search of
employment (Pradilla 2001). Later waves of migration would also comprise
settlers from Latin America and former Spanish colonies (Trenchs Parera et al.
2014).
Considerable political reform has been undertaken since Franco’s death
in 1975, but Castilian remains the only official language of the state. All
citizens of Spain are constitutionally obliged to “know” Castilian, even if it is
not their first language.14 The Catalan sociolinguistic context, however, is not
a simple diglossia.15 With global migration and the growing role of English in
social life (Vila 2018), residents of Catalonia today experience living in a
highly multilingual community, in a territory which is home to a dynamic
population with varying levels of competency in Catalan, Castilian and other
language varieties (Fleming & Ansaldo 2020; Atkinson 2018; Pujolar 2007).
Vernacular use of Catalan, however, remains low in areas where
newcomers of different linguistic heritages continue to reside, where Castilian
is often more familiar and cosmopolitan, constituting certain challenges for
Catalan language planning (Trenchs Parera et al. 2014). There has been
extensive language policy work in Catalonia (Corominas Piulats 2007;
Woolard 2016), research on language acquisition and youth multilingualism
(Alarcón & Garzón 2013), and studies on the relationship between language,

14

Article 3.1., Spanish Constitution of 1978: “El castellano es la lengua española oficial del
Estado. Todos los españoles tienen el deber de conocerla y el derecho a usarla”.
15
The sociolinguistic situation is different for Occitan speakers in Aran, an autonomous
region in north-western Catalonia where Aranese Occitan is also co-official (see Suils &
Huguet 2001).

86



No em canviïs la llengua!
nation, and cultural identity (Woolard & Frekko 2013). Castilian had been
previously instituted as the primary language of public services, state
education and commerce across Spain. Yet, in the wake of Spanish political
reform, a growing movement of Catalanist political parties and Catalan
language advocates have worked to politically institute the Catalan language
as the “common language” of the Catalan community (Urla 2013; Dowling
2018).

2.2.1. Catalan as a “common language”: legislation and normalisation

Pessimism about the condition of the Catalan due to its diminished role under
Franco triggered counter-cultural efforts to reverse further language shift to
Castilian (Fleming & Ansaldo 2020). Since the early 1980s, the aim to
“normalise” the Catalan language (normalització) has been an objective and
priority for successive administrations of the devolved government of
Catalonia (Generalitat de Catalunya), with a commitment to recovering
“normal use of Catalan” (Àngel Pradilla 2015: 47). This has meant in principle
creating new generations of Castilian-Catalan bilinguals to ensure, at the very
least, passive knowledge of both languages. At the level of government, there
have been two fundamental acts of legislation. The first passed in 1983 (Llei
7/1983 – Llei de Normalització Lingüística a Catalunya) and the second in 1998
(Llei 1/1998 – Llei de Política Lingüística). Both aim to ensure Catalan
becoming the primary language of education and public communications.
Catalan was to be instituted as the language of societal cohesion in modern
Catalonia (Àngel Pradilla 2015; Ramallo 2018).
Alongside support for Catalan in the media and public signage, the
principles of normalització are often reflected in the decision not to segregate
pupils at school by preferred or home language: all public schooling is in
Catalan. Some political opponents to normalització have interpreted Catalan
87



No em canviïs la llengua!
language policy as one that indoctrinates newer generations to feel more
Catalan than Spanish (Woolard & Frekko 2013; Cetrà 2019), arguing that
there is discrimination against Castilian speakers in Catalonia who want to
access state schooling in Castilian as a constitutional right. Attempts to
enshrine Catalan language immersion in the Catalan Statute of Autonomy
have been rebuffed by the Spanish Constitutional Court, alongside proposals
that would have made it a requirement for residents of Catalonia to “know”
Catalan (Àngel Pradilla 2015: 49). The Catalan language has no role or status
outside territorial boundaries of Catalan-speaking regions, an issue extending
just as much to the situation for Basque, Galician, or any other co-official
language of other autonomous communities (Amorós Negre 2016).
Top-down language policy has been accompanied by non-governmental
initiatives and campaigns, accompanied by language organisations in
Catalonia which are rooted in counter-cultural and emancipatory efforts that
work to construct Catalonia as a “community of conscience” (Àngel Pradilla
2015: 28) in an age of social and political reform. This has enabled widespread
participation in debates about Catalan self-determination in relation to the
language. Specifically, Catalan has itself become symbolic of a continued
counter-cultural struggle.

2.2.2. Catalan as a “common language”: advocacy and activism

Catalan language policy has instituted a Catalan language immersion system
in state schools as a matter of “social cohesion” in a multilingual context (Pla
per la llengua i la cohesió social; see Corona, Moore & Unamuno 2010). This is
informed by a Catalanist view, inexorably tied to the symbolic nature of the
Catalan language. Catalanist ideals reflect an ideology where the Catalan
nation and language are essentialised concepts in the “re-creation of the
nationalist ideal” (Fleming & Ansaldo 2020: 2; see also Byrne 2019a).
88



No em canviïs la llengua!
Catalanism and Catalan national sentiment have challenged centralised
notions of Castilian Spanishness through the assertive use of the Catalan
language (Dowling 2018). Assemblea Nacional Catalana (Catalan National
Assembly) demanded further Catalan language rights (Caballer Albareda
2007), and smaller organisations such as Crida (Call) and Grups de Defensa de
la Llengua (Groups in Defence of the Language) would engage in non-violent
disruption – such as walking out of restaurants, en masse, when they did not
provide menus in Catalan (Porquet Botey 2013). To react “against demagogic
attempts to stop the process of linguistic normalisation that was already
underway” (Marco Palau 2017: 37), work from the grassroots encouraged
further demand for political action, legitimising the pressure-group role of
several Catalan culture and language organisations.
Contemporary language activism is the domain of several groups. Since
1961, Òmnium Cultural has focused on the celebration of literature, cultural
prizes, and more recently advocating Catalan independence (Deulonder
Camins 2015; Joan & Mari 2019). However, the formation of a significant
language activist organisation, Plataforma per la llengua catalana (Platform for
the Catalan Language) brought together many smaller groups, lobbyists,
student associations and unions with a narrower focus on language rather
than broader Catalan cultural emancipation. Founded as Col·lectiu Esbarzer
(Esbarzer Collective) in 1993, this group consisted initially of young activists
who repeatedly and successfully lobbied government and state actors to live
up to language policy obligations. An example of their earlier activities was
ensuring metro ticket machines printed tickets in Catalan (Marco Palau 2017).
However, the “sovereignty struggle” continues to be a thematic foundation for
the present-day organisation and work of related activists (Dowling 2018: 50).
Linguistic practice need not necessarily code for an individual’s feelings
towards national identity or their position on the question of Catalan
89



No em canviïs la llengua!
independence (Byrne 2019a); other organisations such as Súmate have
brought a Castilian-speaking voice to the Catalan independence movement
(Byrne 2019b). However, in the wake of the Catalan independence
referendum in 2017 and successive pro-independence parliamentary
majorities, cultural and linguistic organisations have begun to speak more
openly about how an independent Catalan state could promote and secure
further domains for the Catalan language that have not yet been realised
(Atkinson 2018). Those who relate their Catalan use to the broader struggle
for independence may claim that language shift in favour of Castilian is
underway and can only be halted if Catalan has “sole officiality”, inferring
political independence (ibid.: 765).
Many pro-Catalan independence groups use only Catalan in their
campaigning (Byrne 2020), and some have promoted the view that the
Catalan language is in danger (Fleming & Ansaldo 2020). The view of Catalan
as a “minoritised” language has been underscored by academic conversation
(Junyent 2020), with further debate about the efficacy of Catalan language
policy within a Spanish political apparatus. Although social mobility in
Catalonia is markedly dependent on knowledge of the Catalan language
(Fleming & Ansaldo 2020), and Catalan is used in different aspects of everyday
life in Catalonia, Catalan language advocacy continues to have ideological
purchase in the political climate. This sets the scene for examining how an
ideological narrative is constructed by language advocates when Catalan
language and language use in Catalonia is discussed.

2.3.

Castilian, code-switching, and ideological discourses

Catalan normalisation is associated with the construction of a civic and deethnicised Catalan linguistic identity for social mobility and assimilation
(Ramallo 2018). “Ethnolinguistic boundary maintenance” through the Catalan
90



No em canviïs la llengua!
language is less evident (Pujolar & Gonzàlez 2013) and Catalan is a “resource”
for constructing a cosmopolitan identity in a population with pronounced
linguistic diversity (Woolard & Frekko 2013: 135). Despite this, Castilian is
understood by almost all the population of Catalonia. Whilst Catalan has
become a “passport to greater social participation” (Corona et al. 2010: 19)
the language has “middle-class indexicalities” (Codó 2018: 14). Tropes of
Catalan L1 speakers belonging to an ethnically Catalan, bourgeois, universityeducated, managerial population are still pervasive (Puigdevall et al. 2018).
Furthermore, the Catalan linguistic context can restrict social mobility for
newcomers in a working-class context, especially where Castilian is a first or
home language (Alarcón & Garzón 2013; Hornsby 2018).
Although many Castilian speakers are competent Catalan speakers,
code-switching to Castilian with Catalan-speaking interlocutors is today a
normative linguistic practice (Codó & Garrido 2010; Pujolar & Gonzàlez
2013). Such code-switching is often referred to as “changing language”
(canviar-se la llengua; Junyent 2020; Pujolar 2020), interpreted as an
accommodation strategy by speakers of Catalan with unfamiliar interlocutors.
This behaviour occurs when “autochthonous Catalan speakers [are known to]
speak Castilian to immigrants or persons judged to be foreign, even when the
immigrants choose to speak Catalan to them” (Fleming & Ansaldo 2020: 102).
This impacts how language use is interpreted as reinforcement the normativity
of code-switching. “Changing language” can expose implicit beliefs that
“people of colour do not speak Catalan, or even people who simply look
different from me do not speak Catalan” (Corona & Block 2020: 784). This
has repercussions for the construction of language ideologies, as codeswitching and other linguistic behaviour can “feed into” circulating ideologies
about (a) language (Verschueren 1998: 65). This informs the basis of my
research context: the use of Castilian with Catalan-speaking interlocutors,
91



No em canviïs la llengua!
when it is explicitly referenced in discourse, exhibits a metapragmatic
awareness of the implications of language use.

2.4.

Don’t change my language!: research context

During a session of the Catalan Parliament on 12 February 2020, the activities
of a new group of Catalan language advocates were featured in a speech by
Anna Erra, a pro-independence MP and mayor of the town of Vic.16 No em
canviïs la llengua is a group of Catalan speakers who were “born abroad”
(nascuts a fora). These language advocates had been using social media
platforms such as Twitter, and infrequently organised public events to demand
that their Catalan-speaking interlocutors stop changing to Castilian when
talking with non-native speakers. The group had been active since 2019 and
invited both “native” and “non-native” Catalans alike to participate in events
that underline this message. Erra praised their work, stating that
“autochthonous Catalans” (catalans autòctons) need to “seduce new speakers”
(seduir nous parlants) and “put an end to this very obvious habit […] where
people always speak in Castilian with someone because their physical
appearance or their name suggests they do not appear to be Catalan” (posar fi
al costum molt present en determinades zones del país de parlar sempre en
castellà amb qualsevol persona que pel seu aspecte físic o pel seu nom no sembli
catalana). Erra’s speech attracted considerable media attention as her words
were considered to be ideologically charged by her Catalan nationalism.
Additionally, some foreign-born individuals were suspicious of the group,

16

https://www.elnacional.cat/ca/politica/anna-erra-demana-parlar-catala-nouvingutspremsa-espanyola-embogeix 469533 102.html (accessed 26 August 2020).

92



No em canviïs la llengua!
which they found to be unrepresentative of the concerns of most non-native
Catalan speakers.17
At one point, Spanish unionist political party Ciudadanos appealed in a
letter to Spanish and European Union ombudsmen to investigate No em canviïs
la llengua for its alleged “racist and xenophobic overtones”18. Rosario
Palomino19, a Peruvian-born Catalan political activist and co-ordinator of No
em canviïs la llengua, responded in various tweets to explain the group and
dismiss allegations that the initiative was being operated and funded by the
government of Catalonia (see Figure 1).

Figure 8: Example of response: @rosariopalomi71, 15 February 202020

17

https://lareplica.es/no-em-canviïs-la-llengua-racismo-realidad-o-normalizacionlinguistica/ (accessed 19 January 2020).
18
“tintes racistas y xenófobos”,
https://www.lavanguardia.com/vida/20200213/473531979246/ciudadanos-lleva-aldefensor-del-pueblo-y-la-ue-la-campana-de-la-generalitat-no-me-cambies-la-lengua-porracista.html (accessed 26 February 2020).
19
At the time of writing, Palomino is the 32nd candidate on the Junts per Catalunya list for
Barcelona at the upcoming 2021 Catalan Parliamentary election.
20
“You are wrong, the ‘No em canviïs la llengua’ campaign is NOT a Catalan government
initiative. I personally (a Catalan woman of Peruvian origin) started the campaign directed

93



No em canviïs la llengua!
The media attention around No em canviïs la llengua piqued my interest
as a foreign-born Catalan speaker. As part of ongoing research, I was visiting
Barcelona next week and had initially made plans to meet and talk with
members of Plataforma per la llengua catalana to begin a case study of Catalan
language activism. However, the attention given to this newer group was a
unique opportunity to examine language activism in the context of a specific
debate.

2.5.

Positionality and methods

This study forms part of a research project on language activism in Catalonia,
Norway, and Scotland. Following five years of ethnographic field trips in
Norway with young Nynorsk activists, my ongoing research with Catalan and
Scots activists are “extended case studies” (see Jerolmack & Khan 2018) which
capitalise on the other languages I speak, my location and my political
connections. As a smaller study, my Catalan work uses my unpublished
postgraduate thesis as a methodological springboard (Puchowski 2018). Due
to pandemic restrictions in 2020, my work in Catalonia was unfortunately cut
short as I was not able to return to continue fieldwork. I have decided to
present this data as a brief snapshot of developments in February 2020.
My research questions concern who language activists are, how activism
is discursively performed, and how activists construct an ideological narrative.
This work extends beyond variationist and interactionalist approaches, aiming
instead at the observational study of the subjectivities of language use, and
how discourse about language is embedded cultural history and functional

towards autochthonous Catalan-speakers (autochthon: a person who is born in the same
place they reside)” // “@maitepagaza reports the Catalan Government’s ‘No em canviïs la
llengua’ campaign to the EU ombudsman: ‘It’s racist and xenophobic’, violates the
Constitution and the European Charter of Fundamental Rights and promotes
discriminatory behaviour”.

94



No em canviïs la llengua!
tradition (Hymes 1974). My style of sociolinguistic work examines linguistic
variation and change where it is assigned social meaning. I take a “socially
embedded” (Bell 2016), anthropological approach to sociolinguistic fieldwork,
combining subjective narrative with a “thick description” (Richards 2005: 50)
of interactions and events based on fieldnote jottings and transcribed semistructured interviews.
Despite having not lived in Catalonia, I speak Catalan competently. Both
Norwegian and Catalan were part of my undergraduate studies in 2014, and
I have a passive understanding of Castilian. I volunteered as a Catalan-English
interpreter in the period surrounding the 1 October 2017 Catalan
independence referendum and have spoken at pro-Catalan self-determination
protests in Scotland. I have made friends with Catalan independence
campaigners, and have visited Catalonia as a tourist, on cultural exchanges,
and to attend political rallies. I have been exposed to contemporary Catalan
political discourse and am familiar with organisations and political groups that
participate in Catalan sociopolitical debate. I should mention that I engaged
with the emerging No em canviïs la llengua debate on Twitter, responding to
an El Mundo article about Anna Erra’s intervention:
“I am English, I am a Catalan speaker, and I don’t know how to
speak Castilian. I don’t remember how many times someone has
addressed or attended to me in Castilian because I am a foreigner in
Catalonia. Yes, I have very white skin with light-coloured eyes, a
guiri21, and I speak Catalan. We exist. Don’t change my language.” 22

21

guiri – popular term used in Catalan and Castilian to refer to other nonMediterranean/Anglo-Saxon European tourists, stereotypically sunburnt and/or drunk.
22
https://twitter.com/kvisleis/status/1227668008077795328?s=20 @kvisleis, 12
February 2020

95



No em canviïs la llengua!
This tweet was retweeted 1,688 times, receiving 5,102 likes23. It shows
personal bias and frustration; I speak southern British English as a first
language and have a white, northern European appearance. Having made
several visits to Catalonia since 2014, I have experienced being addressed in
Castilian or English by Catalan speaking interlocutors. This contrasts with my
experiences in Norway, where my appearance and origin rarely impacted my
ability to use Norwegian.
I use ethnographies and observational studies as an approach to
studying language activism, which is rooted in my own experiences as a
participant in language activist organisations. During a year-long academic
exchange in Norway, I became a member of the committee of a university
Nynorsk organisation, contributing to newspapers and radio debates.
Likewise, my data collection approach in Catalonia is situated in my support
of language activists and my own “non-native” Catalan speakership. Social
media participation became useful in-road for establishing further rapport in
e-mails and phone calls with Plataforma per la llengua catalana. My response
to events in February enhanced access when contacting the de facto organisers
of No em canviïs la llengua (Rosario Palomino and Matthew Tree), requesting
an interview, and gaining research access to their public event.
Observations are contextualised through participants’ statements and
an embodied perspective (Crang & Cook 2007; Madden 2013). I intend to
describe “observed events by way of internalising participants’ meaning”
(Roller & Lavrakas 2015: 207). Engaging with individuals and groups directly
to gather experiential data is enhanced through building rapport with actors
who have useful, nuanced perspectives and ranging internal beliefs about
language (Garrett 2012; Peltz 2017). The quality of this work is dependent on

23

As of 22 August 2020.

96



No em canviïs la llengua!
personal relationships and the ability to gain access to research spaces (see
Bernard 2006; Ahearn 2017) and understanding that the data is not
descriptively exhaustive.
I arrived in Barcelona for a Plataforma per la llengua catalana awards
evening on 17 February, which was the thematic basis for my interviews on
18 February with two employees of the organisation. On 19 February, I
interviewed one of the organisers of No em canviïs la llengua before attending
one of their events on 20 February. My data is therefore drawn primarily from
three interviews (2 in Catalan, 1 in English) and jottings from a No em canviïs
la llengua event.

2.6.

Analytical approach

As language ideological research, this is a study of language activists and their
metalanguage – statements about language (Verschueren 1998). It hybridises
embedded data collection, qualitative interviewing, analysis of discourse, a
holistic focus on language histories, and the dynamic role of biographic
sensitivities (Zienkowski 2016). In my analysis, I highlight metalinguistic
devices which refer to broader ideological stances, as well as the wider
sociolinguistic dynamics surrounding the use of Catalan and Castilian. This is
a sociolinguistic study that draws on discourse from a linguistic
anthropological perspective, focusing data analysis on what language activists
say and how this relates to a wider conversation about language (Gilmore
2011). As these narratives exist in wider conversations about language with
multiple subjects, I take a metapragmatic approach to discourse analysis.
This approach positions the linguistic subject as a stakeholder in
language ideological debates (Errington 2003). There is no such thing as the
“sociopolitically disinterested language user” (Kroskrity 2008: 6–8), and
statements about language cannot be held to be ideologically neutral
97



No em canviïs la llengua!
(Coupland & Jaworski 1998). Where (a) language and linguistic issues are
discussed, there is a “culturally determined reflection upon language” (Fischli
2011: 32), and metalanguage can be rooted in wider metadiscourses
(Jaworski, Coupland & Galasiński 1998). Metalanguage is “socially and
culturally regimented” (Blommaert 2011: 127) and language users’
statements refer to the contextual meaning of linguistic practices (such as
“changing language”) to construct an ideological discourse (Duranti 2009:
16). Metapragmatic analysis examines metalanguage in context and is an
applied method for examining how sociolinguistic discourse constructed
(Bucholtz & Hall 2004, see also Zienkowski 2016; Karlander 2017). As
language can be “distorted” in its agency to simply communicate propositions
(Hodge & Kress 1993: 6), explicit discourse about language serves a broader
cultural objective (Lucy 1993).
Specific to my research, the narrative constructed by Catalan language
activists is a form of metadiscourse. As I address what activists say in my
analysis, I refer to a range of diverse statements, phrases, and utterances. In
this Catalan case study, metalanguage is presented within reference to broader
cultural, historical, and political themes. I begin by outlining these themes in
the context of the activism of Plataforma before directly addressing data from
No em canviïs la llengua.

2.7.

A bunker of Catalans: metadiscourses at Plataforma

As I had initially planned, I attended the 2020 Premis Martí Gasull I Roig at
Barcelona’s Teatre Poliorama. As part of the yearly calendar of events hosted
by Plataforma per la llengua catalana, I was there to familiarise myself with
the organisation’s current projects and how these were expressed in relation
to their long-term ideological objectives. Afterwards, I was invited to dinner
with the grup tècnic (permanent staff) of Plataforma, and the following day I
98



No em canviïs la llengua!
interviewed employees Daniel Roldan (international affairs) and Miguel Gil
(administration) at their main office. I asked generic questions to both about
their role at the organisation and the awards ceremony. This was followed by
a broader discussion of Catalan language activism, their interpretation of
government language policy, migration, and comparisons with other minority
languages. I use these interviews to frame the relationship between the activist
metadiscourses of Plataforma and No em canviïs la llengua.
As an employee who also operates the “complaints service” (servei de
queixes), where individuals can report linguistic rights violations, Roldan
underlines that assertive use of Catalan is a vital part of Catalan language
activism. Notably, he framed the use of Catalan as an act that is strongly tied
up with activism in and of itself, associating language activism with linguistic
agency:
(1) Roldan: Being a language activist is using the language in a positive

way,

[…] An invitation to become a speaker. Even if the attitude of a
person I am interacting with may clearly be supremacist [who
has] incorporated this supremacist vision that the state, [Castilian
language] and [Spanish culture] are above everything else, […]
What I want is that the whole population can use Catalan in a
normal way and be invited to participate
The use of the term “supremacist” to describe the Spanish state and the
Castilian language are counterposed by the description of Catalan as an
“invitation” to others to “participate”. This rhetoric implicitly infers that
Catalan is not the language of everyone in Catalonia, and the Castilian
imposed as an official language by the state is an act of symbolic violence. This
led to a wider discussion of the aims of Catalan as a “tool of social cohesion”
99



No em canviïs la llengua!
(eina de cohesió social). I asked if there were other organisations which worked
for the “same motives and with a comparable job” (mateixos motius i amb un
treball comparable). As both Erra’s speech and No em canviïs la llengua had
been mentioned (and supported with applause and statements) in the
previous night’s awards ceremony, it was not surprising that Roldan was
aware of the attention given to the group:
(2) Roldan: Without a doubt, [Plataforma] are the biggest organisation that
is specialised in language, but I believe that there are other
organisations. Most recently the ‘no em canviïs la llengua’
initiative has emerged, having had a particular impact on social
media
This branched further into the concept of “participation”, which raised
topics of immigration and Castilian use. Catalan for the sake of social cohesion
is a central theme; he draws on how personal experience has informed his
relationship with the Catalan language and his work as part of Plataforma:
(3) Roldan: It is that we do not want [Catalan] to be excluding, we focus on
it as a tool for cohesion. We do not want to create a bunker of
Catalans, which they already are, and for them to reject having
contact with people who are not Catalan-speakers. On the
contrary. […] I will use my dad as an example. When he was
born, he did not speak Catalan, he did not know it. He learned it
when he was 20. […] He began to learn, to interact more in
Catalan, to make it his own, and when I was born, he spoke to me
in Catalan […] people should make it their own and not see it as
an alien thing
100



No em canviïs la llengua!

Drawing on the experience of his Castilian-speaking father from Murcia
whose family moved to Catalonia in 1949, Roldan indicates a personal and
contextualised appreciation for Catalan through his own family. The issue of
“changing language” is relevant here; if an individual is not assertive in their
use of Catalan, the language will continue to appear “alien” to Castilian
speakers, “excluding” them from the language. Metapragmatic awareness of
Castilian use today gives greater cause to further the ideological aims of
Catalan advocacy. Roldan’s description of a “bunker of Catalans” refers to an
exclusive Catalan linguistic community that he argues does exist,
contextualising Erra’s use of the words autochthonous and native-born as
perhaps accurate descriptions. Interestingly, my conversation with Gil did not
address No em canviïs la llengua as activists directly, but touched on many of
the same themes of social cohesion, integration, and challenging normative
Castilian use:
(4) Gil:

Article 3.1. makes Castilian official across the entire State, and
what’s more, it gives it this “duty to know it”, which basically means
that people who are born with families speaking Catalan, or Basque
or Galician have the obligation to know Castilian. Thus, any
Castilian-speaker can travel about the State and expect to be
understood, but reversed with one’s own language, reversed, no.
This means therefore that basically there is this idea of internal
colonisation, […] Or put another way, there is a group which has
rights across the territory which others do not have

Castilian cultural-linguistic “supremacy” appears again. Gil, however,
focused his explanation on the role of legislation and existing political
101



No em canviïs la llengua!
frameworks. Worsened by Spain’s political history and the legacy of Francoist
dictatorship, “internal colonisation” has disfavoured the Catalan language,
giving more rights to one group but not “others” – non-Castilian Spaniards.
This argument is made through the rhetoric of language rights as a moral issue
(see Ricento 2000). Political reform and liberalisation of language politics in
Spain, however important they are, have not rectified the situation:
(5) Gil:

Before, [using Castilian] also meant direct repression. […] Or, put
another way, in the sense that they could stop you, they could arrest
you, they could fine you. And therefore, this has created a series of
fears and prejudices in Catalan-speakers who make the habit of
changing to Castilian in several situations. So, the people that do
not do this, in truth, they are actually doing activism, they are
fighting actively against a situation

Gil’s narrative argues that the Catalan language is conceptually
associated with the history: “fines and punishment” and a range of internalised
“fears and prejudices” continue to permeate social consciousness. The use of
Castilian is described here as a “habit”, aligning with Erra’s statement again,
inferring that individuals can change their behaviour if they want to. Assertive
use of Catalan – the direct act of not switching – represents an indirect form
of activism.
Encouraging people to not “change language” is associated with the
activities of Plataforma per la llengua catalana, although in their case, this is
done through professional activity and lobbying policymakers. I noted that the
metalanguage and themes in my interviews with Roldan and Gil relate directly
to No em canviïs la llengua and their ongoing activity. My conversation with
Matthew Tree two days later focused on similar topics around language
102



No em canviïs la llengua!
activism, policy, and Catalonia’s politics. By discussing the No em canviïs la
llengua event planned for the following day, and the media reaction to the
group the week prior, I can contextualise the metalanguage used by No em
canviïs la llengua in the public space.

2.8.

Our little group of Romanians and Africans: non-native

metadiscourses
Matthew Tree is an English-born Catalan language author and prominent
member of No em canviïs la llengua. He is, however, known for frequent
participation in different kinds of Catalan cultural events. Tree has lived in
Catalonia for 35 years, having moved there from England when he turned 26.
He is known for being on side with Catalan independence and selfdetermination, and his work and public engagement as a published author
offers a useful subjective commentary on the linguistic context of No em canviïs
la llengua and his own involvement in the group. We met for an interview at
his apartment in Barcelona, and I asked similar questions used with Roldan
and Gil. Unlike my conversations with Roldan and Gil, Tree’s interview was
conducted in English, and I structured our conversation in relation to my
interest in the group as on one hand a non-native Catalan speaker, but on the
other as an outsider. At the beginning, Tree’s description of No em canviïs la
llengua is not wholly comparable with the more regimented and professional
activist work of Plataforma:
(6) Tree: [No em canviïs la llengua] is a very simple, very small association. It
is not even a registered organisation. It is the idea that came from a
long-standing Peruvian friend of mine, of ours in fact, who simply
got fed up, after living here for years and years speaking fluent
Catalan to Catalan speakers, wherever they were from, and always
103



No em canviïs la llengua!
being replied to in Spanish simply because she has Amerindian
features
Tree began by formulating No em canviïs la llengua as a “very small
association” that arose out of perceptions of linguistic discrimination. Tree
contextualises the group through his friendship with Rosario Palomino, the
wider membership of the group, and political developments in Catalonia in
tandem with the dynamics of language use. Catalan speakers with diverse
linguistic backgrounds and ethnic heritage are subject to the behaviour of
“native-born” Catalan speakers; Tree, Palomino and others in the group are
consequently “fed up” due to their relationship with the Catalan language and
desire to use it. His own experience as a foreign-born author and his public
work offers an anecdotal reference to emphasise the social significance of
internal Spanish migration, newer migration from outside Spain, and the
dynamics of switching between Catalan and Castilian. This is at one point
structured with reference to Francoism, where normative Castilian use is a
supposed legacy:
(7) Tree: I got a load of work giving talks at Catalan language centres for
adults teaching Catalan to adults. [...] I would harangue the Catalan
audiences going to these talks [...] saying why do you do this? And
I got people from all ages and every answer was different. The older
ones said because under Franco you could be beaten up or you could
be thrown off a tram or fined for using Catalan. Other people said
because they were trying to help these people. [...] Other people
said it was a way of being polite including young people like that it
is polite to speak to an African in Spanish even though that African
is speaking to you in fluent Catalan. Again, that is not polite. That is
104



No em canviïs la llengua!
actually being rude. […] It certainly comes from a hangover from
the past. One African-American [...] suggested to me that maybe
that is what native-born Catalan speakers do: they do not want any
aggression coming from anyone because they are using Catalan. So,
they go into Spanish as their way of smiling, as a kind of defensive
act
Tree has identified code-switching to Castilian, specifically when nonnative speakers attempt to use Catalan, as a “hangover from the past”. This
term is suggestive of the “internal colonisation” mentioned by Gil. However,
Tree’s reflections on Castilian linguistic practice were focused on Catalonia’s
ethnic diversity beyond internal Spanish migration. “Native-born” Catalan
users have already grown up to respond to outsiders from the rest of Spain in
Castilian as either a form of “help” or a “defensive act”. This practice has been
extended to newcomers from further afield, as they either assume outsiders
do not speak Catalan (cf. Corona & Block 2020) or that using Castilian is
“polite” (see González Castro 2019: 47-48 for a comparative interpretation).
His presentation of the group and its background is interpreted through the
experiences of Palomino, who herself comes from Peru and speaks Castilian
as a first language. According to Tree, Palomino assertively speaks Catalan but
is often spoken back to in Castilian:
(8) Tree: She saw this as a kind of subliminal racism. ‘You do not belong to
our world, so do not even try to speak Catalan to us.’ Something like
that, so she then found by talking to other foreign-born Catalan
speakers […] and she found out that we all had the same thing in
common: That even people who have a slightly different phenotype
from the Mediterranean phenotype, like Romanians or Germans or
105



No em canviïs la llengua!
whatever, have had trouble convincing Catalan speakers to speak
back to them in Catalan where they are using Catalan all the time
Here, Tree formulates a discrimination narrative through Palomino.
Although she has a legal right to use Catalan in Catalonia, Palomino’s ethnic
appearance is interpreted as the reason for her interlocutors’ code-switching.
The argument is that it is non-native Catalan speakers who have experienced
a form of racism and discrimination where they are denied the opportunity to
use and be addressed in Catalan. Her right to use Catalan has not been enough
to guarantee her speakership, and Tree’s explanation puts this down to a
“subliminal racism” that her interlocutors have. The response to No em canviïs
la llengua that has exposed multiple voices and exemplified the complexity of
Catalan sociolinguistic debates:
(9) Tree: Whenever you get anything that is about identity and language, they
[Ciudadanos] will start calling you Nazis and supremacists at the
drop of a hat. When the Mayor of Vic [Anna Erra] made a comment
about the association of ‘No em canviïs la llengua’, she should have
known that she was walking across the linguistic minefield. She
should have been a bit more careful with her language. […] It is just
ridiculous. I think of Rosario and our little group of Romanians and
Africans and stuff and being taken to the European Court of Human
Rights for discrimination. I mean, it is crazy
Tree’s statements present a view of the Catalan sociolinguistic situation
as one which is highly dynamic, phrased here as a “minefield”. Erra used
charged vocabulary due to a highly sensitive political context. The politician
has been criticised and condemned, but Tree sees that contemporary political
106



No em canviïs la llengua!
arguments about Catalan relating to supremacy are nonsensical when put in
the context of No em canviïs la llengua. Tree’s depiction of his group suggested
that they have become contentious due to implications of ethnicity,
nationality, and the normative use of Castilian amongst Catalonia’s
multiethnic and multilingual communities. But pointing out that the group is
both “small” and made up of “Romanians and Africans”, No em canviïs la
llengua is a private, voluntary, loosely organised group of ethnically distinct
people from the general Catalan population. This contrasts with larger
organisations, “native-born” Catalan advocates, and top-down policy
mechanisms.
Tree’s interview contained several responses to the allegations made
against No em canviïs la llengua. The sections I highlight stress that the group
is both a small informal collective, and that its membership is demographically
distinct: accusations of racism, supremacy, and government funding are
fundamentally incorrect assessments. The group has emerged despite topdown policy, government initiatives, and other activism, as code-switching to
Castilian with “foreign-born Catalan speakers” persists. No em canviïs la
llengua, therefore, embodies an ideological appeal to wider Catalan society
and speakers’ agency. This constitutes an intervention in Catalan
sociolinguistic discourse. Attending the No em canviïs la llengua event the
following

day,

all

my

interviews

contextualised

how

this

activist

metadiscourse is performed in the public space with multiple participants and
an audience.

2.9.

The language that unites us: non-native activism in the public

space
Coinciding with the same week as International Mother Language Day (see
Figure 2), No em canviïs la llengua hosted an open-mic evening at a community
107



No em canviïs la llengua!
theatre in Barcelona. The setting was not as formal as the awards evening
hosted by Plataforma earlier that week. Both Palomino and Tree steered the
evening’s proceedings loosely. Attendance was not ticketed, and it was open
to the general public. It was unclear how the recent media outburst would
impact attendance. Speaking to Palomino before the event began, she
explained to me that they use the theatre often and that “normally, we fill up!”
(normalment omplim!). However, there were roughly 40 attendees in
attendance and half the seats were empty. There were non-white faces in the
audience, though they seemed mostly middle-aged. Having attended the
Plataforma awards ceremony days before, I noted a similar age demographic.

Figure 9: Promotional digital flyer for event24

24

Text reads: “Mother Language Day 2020 // Thursday 20 February at 19:00 we celebrate
Mother Language Day with Carme Sansa, Matthew Tree, Aleix Renyé, Rosario Palomino,

108



No em canviïs la llengua!
Ten chairs were placed on stage with various speakers, each with a
different linguistic background. As a format, each speaker on stage was invited
to introduce themselves, read a text (a poem, a short story) in a different
language before offering a translation in Catalan. Speakers exhibited varying
fluency in Catalan but appeared to be understood and well received by the
audience. The event began with Palomino welcoming the audience, stating
that “we are delighted that we can come here from all over the place” (estem
encantats que puguem arribar de tot arreu), and that the objective of events
like this one is to “get 10 million activists for the language” (aconseguir 10
milions d’activistes per la llengua). “10 million” is an important phrase, having
also been used by Plataforma per la llengua catalana in their own material to
highlight the size of the language in comparison with comparatively smaller
European languages with considerably more political status, such as Finnish
or Greek.25 Palomino has reinterpreted the phrase in the context of No em
canviïs la llengua: their events are open to the public and intend to raise
linguistic awareness which would lead to all 10 million Catalan speakers
becoming “activists for the language”.
Matthew Tree gave a small introduction, framing the event as a
“celebration of language” (celebració de la llengua). This refers to the event
marking International Mother Language Day, although the use of the world
llengua could be interpreted here to mean the Catalan language as well. The
banner on stage claimed a unifying effect of the Catalan language (see Figure
3), and my interpretation of Tree’s statement was that the event was being
presented a “celebration” of both Catalan and other languages. Both Tree and
Palomino dismissed accusations of racism and supremacy. Palomino cited her

Pep Ribas, Judit Raso Eho // Orfeó Martinenc, Avinguda Meridiana 97 on the corner with
Consell de Cent, Clot metro station (Line 1)”
25
https://www.som10milions.cat/ (accessed 19 January 2021).

109



No em canviïs la llengua!
experiences of being addressed in Castilian by virtue of her appearance. This
is further underlined when she addressed the word autochthonous in relation
to Anna Erra’s presentation of No em canviïs la llengua in the Catalan
Parliament. Palomino emphasised that race, accent, and appearance do play a
role in the way that people like her are received by other Catalan speakers; “it
is as simple as that” (és tan senzill com això). She referenced the slogan on the
banner — “we will continue our language that makes us equal” (continuem la
nostra llengua que ens iguala) — stating a personal resolve.
Let us defend the language 26; that unites us; that makes us equal; that makes
us brothers and sisters.
THE CATALAN LANGUAGE

Figure 10: Image of stage taken during event – a non-native Catalan speaker
reads a text in their “mother tongue” as the audience and other contributors
listen

26

Alternatively, “we are defending the language”.

110



No em canviïs la llengua!
Palomino concluded her intervention referring to Quechua, which she
argued was the language that would have been her mother tongue, had it not
been for Spanish colonialism in Peru. This statement drew attention to the role
and symbolism of Castilian in language shift both in Spain and abroad, albeit
implicitly. Some other speakers drew on similar experiences of belonging to a
minority or colonised community. One man from an island in the Goa region
of India spoke that evening, as well as a participant from French Catalonia
(see Hawkey 2015) who drew on Catalan being his mother tongue within the
different context of the French state where Catalan has far fewer speakers and
no official status. At one point, Palomino framed the use and promotion of
Catalan as synonymous with wanting to “protect all languages” (protegir totes
les llengües). Despite its “10 million speakers”, Catalan is also positioned by
this discourse as a minoritised language where speakers from diverse linguistic
heritages reflect on the status of other languages around the world and relate
it to Catalan’s position. I observe here that some participants come with a
heightened awareness of sociolinguistic and cultural debates, and this has
informed their stance towards Catalan, akin to a sociolinguistic “mirror effect”
(Cortès-Colomé, Barrieras & Comellas 2016). Consequently, statements
during the event echoed an ideological assertion that Catalan is intended to
be a social unifier and is associated with a participative Catalan identity. One
participant introduced herself as originally from Romania but stated her
preference to call herself Catalan; “I am a Catalan woman” (sóc catalana).
Another woman, a Russian speaker, began by stating “I am from here, from
Barcelona” (jo sóc d’aquí, de Barcelona). These statements contextualised their
use of Catalan and participation in the event as associating with an adopted
Catalan identity, with no essential reason to be excluded from the Catalan
linguistic community.

111



No em canviïs la llengua!
Themes of social cohesion and solidarity came to the fore towards the
end of the event. This was no more underlined than by the President of the
Coordinadora d’Associacions per la Llengua (an association of small
organisations which promote Catalan), Pep Ribas. Ribas’ speech was a
reflection on a traditional nationalist concept of Catalans being “one people”
(sol poble), but he stated that this term is misunderstood. As No em canviïs la
llengua is oriented around non-native speakers of Catalan, he reframed the
term to explain that its meaning does not infer an isolated Catalan identity or
ethnic supremacy (see Pujolar & Gonzàlez 2013). He argued that the “people”,
united by a language, are invited to integrate and to create a parallel Catalanusing society to “enjoy the same opportunities” (gaudir de les mateixes
oportunitats). He ended his statement with “it is important to speak about
linguistic diversity, recognising that co-existence is participation” (cal parlar
de la diversitat lingüística, reconeixent que la convivència és participació).
Palomino concluded the event by echoing Pep’s remarks, encouraging the
audience and participants to use the Catalan language in “our Catalonia”
(Catalunya nostra), and that it is “one people” (sol poble) and “one nation”
(sola nació). Reinforcing these terms in the context of Catalan, therefore,
underlined a claim to identity, resonating with a broader Catalanist ideology.
By co-opting a phrase such as “one people” as a term based on linguistic
membership, the use of Catalan can be both a statement about a claim to
Catalan speakership and a declarative act of belonging to the Catalan
imagined community.

2.10.

Discussion

Instances of metalanguage in the data show how No em canviïs la llengua seeks
to reframe ideological discourses around linguistic identity and authenticity.
Within the multilingual and globalised context of Catalonia, individuals
112



No em canviïs la llengua!
associate with a range of linguistic identities. Fundamentally, using a specific
language in a particular context in itself can be interpreted as a marked act of
language activism where it constitutes “social action” (Avineri et al. 2019: 2ff).
Specific to this case study, a Catalan speaker “muda” (Puigdevall et al. 2018)
can be extended into further concerted acts of Catalan linguistic citizenship in
a polemicised context marked by the existence of an overarching acrolect
which is commercially and politically influential – Castilian.
As the social context, Catalonia has undergone several waves of
migration which have centred Castilian as a domestic and familiar language
amongst a growing proportion of the population. Legalistic and modernist
cultural narratives which aim to institute the Catalan language as a “common
language” are continually challenged by the dynamism of globalisation and
demographic change. Use of Castilian is favoured in both informal/basilectal
and commercial/international market domains (Woolard & Frekko 2013), and
contemporary research has identified a “de-ethnicisation” (Pujolar & Gonzàlez
2013) of the Catalan language. However, this has not instituted Catalan as a
fully “civic” voice in popular consciousness (Atkinson 2018: 779).
My research shows that some non-native Catalan speakers are, however,
determined to pursue the ideological aims of linguistic normalisation – to
“continue our language”, the “language that makes us brothers and sisters”.
They have established a platform for this position to be adequately expressed,
drawing on their own experiences and building on existing activist
metalanguage. Catalan use is not addressed here as a matter of rights or
policy, as these speakers assert “control over their language” and derive their
speakership from their own experiences (Stroud 2001: 353). The research
does not suggest that No em canviïs la llengua wishes to speak on behalf of all
Catalan new speakers; their public engagement is part of an outreach strategy.
Attendance was not high at the event, compared to the Plataforma awards
113



No em canviïs la llengua!
ceremony, and the ad hoc style of the evening was indicative of a casual
organisation. In effect, the sporadic public events and social media
interventions organised by the No em canviïs la llengua are a soapbox which
offers a sense of community for a group of new speakers. I have noted that
extant rhetoric is reinterpreted by non-native activists to assert an ideological
pro-Catalan message from their position as new speakers of the language. In
particular, these individuals use their platform to rhetorically exploit and
renegotiate various familiar ideological statements, all of which incorporate
an interpretation of Catalan as a symbol of equality and anti-discrimination.
It is however the broader media reaction to No em canviïs la llengua that
demonstrates that discourses surrounding “changing language” remain
semiotically loaded for some Catalan speakers. No em canviïs la llengua
constitutes a new group of non-native Catalan users whose social action
denounces “changing language” as part of a broader ideological goal. Catalan
is part of their adopted identity, and instances of code-switching to Castilian
are interpreted as a threat to the “sense of community, solidarity or
authenticity” (Costa 2015: 129) that Catalan speakership provides. I interpret
this as rooted in Catalan being indexicalised as a medium for social mobility,
affiliation with other Catalan speakers, and the current political atmosphere
rooted in discourses of self-determination and Catalan national sentiment.

2.11.

Conclusion

No em canviïs la llengua is an informal collective of non-native Catalan
speakers whose activities can be reviewed as an extension of extant Catalan
language metadiscourses. Through informed descriptions, I have described
how their media interventions and social media interactions constitute an
ideological outlet where a conceptual narrative about Catalan and its speakers
are constructed. Catalan is presented as a guarantor of linguistic diversity;
114



No em canviïs la llengua!
Catalan speakers are multiethnic, multilingual interlocutors, and the Catalan
language indexicalises unity and collective identity. Conversely, the use of
Castilian with those “born abroad” is antithetical to this narrative, and the nonnative Catalan speakers who constitute No em canviïs la llengua argue that
foreign-born

Catalan

speakers

are

linguistically

discriminated

by

contemporary linguistic practice in Catalonia. As an ideological platform, No
em canviïs la llengua intervenes in the public space to argue that “changing
language” and normative use of Castilian restricts access to Catalan
speakership for non-natives.
Linguistic normalisation is a long-term ideological goal for Catalan
language advocates. No em canviïs la llengua expands on the rhetorical framing
of Catalan speakers as an imagined community, where themes of social
inclusion, “common language” and “normalisation” are integral. This type of
informal language activism latches onto rhetoric about participative identity,
specifying that contemporary Catalan linguistic identity is not assigned any
essential ethnic or demographic attributes. Instead, individual agency,
participation, and ideologically assertive use of the language is critical.
The broad reaction, however, to this initiative and the politicians who
support it is indicative of the political debates which concern language use in
Catalonia. Castilian is the presumed cosmopolitan and interethnic language
variety across Spain; an effective non-ethnic, unmarked medium for
communication for many in Catalonia. As with formal Catalan language
organisations such as Plataforma per la llengua catalana, No em canviïs la
llengua engages with a wider sociopolitical discourse around Catalan nationbuilding and Catalan linguistic citizenship. This is a continuity of a historic
counter-cultural effort, where Catalan self-determination and nationhood
today vie for cultural and political legitimacy in a globalised, multilingual
world.
115



No em canviïs la llengua!
2.12.

Implications for further research

I have highlighted the emergence of No em canviïs la llengua so that their
activities may extend Catalan language activism beyond traditional policyoriented organisations such as Plataforma, or explicit activities pertaining to
in-group or “native” Catalan users. No em canviïs la llengua constitutes a form
of activism centred on linguistic “performance” (Avineri et al. 2019: 145) –
the use of Catalan in social life contra Castilian – and therefore the agency of
Catalan users generally. My research here intends to reinforce the importance
of a fluid, non-essentialist conceptualisation of language activism (De Korne
forthcoming), encompassing interventions in metapragmatic discourses and
acts of linguistic citizenship. This paper gives voice to a smaller, lesser-known,
less formally established group of individuals who are also stakeholders in
contemporary sociolinguistic discourses. This is to complement mainstream
sociolinguistic research by examining sociolinguistic agency and the linguistic
subjectivity (see Woschitz 2019). Unfortunate time and access constraints
have meant that this work is a “rapid assessment” (Bernard 2006; Pink &
Morgan 2013) of Catalan language activism. Any observational fieldwork is
open-ended by nature (Marcus 2007), and further discourse analysis and
actual ethnographic research in this field would be indispensable. This paper
sets the ground for a more comprehensive critical analysis of contemporary
(Catalan) language activism in different contexts and a theoretical
appreciation of speaker biographies.

116



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’

3. ‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
First peer reviewed by Multiethnica
Revised and sent to Journal of Linguistic Anthropology 27
Abstract: This article critically examines how young Norwegian Nynorsk
activists engage with Sámi and Kven linguistic issues, drawing on five years of
observational research with the Norwegian Language Youth (Norsk
Målungdom). Using multi-modal ethnographic discourse analysis, I highlight
where Nynorsk activism further extends to engaging with Indigenous language
communities. I present how long-standing Nynorsk activist discourses around
building linguistic tolerance for Norwegian dialects can be rhetorically
expanded to tolerance for wider linguistic diversity. In doing so, I argue that,
from a broader sociolinguistic standpoint, language activism does not need to
be theoretically essentialised towards a concern with one language community
alone.
Keywords: Norwegian, Nynorsk, language activism, Indigenous languages,
Norsk Målungdom
Nynorsk (lit. new Norwegian) is one of two orthographies of the Norwegian
language, the other being Bokmål (lit. book-language). The existence of two
forms of written Norwegian stems from the political fervour of the National
Romantic period, where national sentiment developed as part of the
establishment of a Norwegian state after political autonomy was gained in
1814. Until this point, written Danish was the language of schooling and
administration. Over many decades, different proposals would compete to be
the written standard of Norwegian. Norway’s minoritised Indigenous Sámi
and Kven populations, both ethnolinguistically non-Germanic, were
(unsurprisingly) not accounted for in national language policy projects (Bull

27

Nota bene: this paper is currently being revised after receiving peer-reviewers’ feedback,
and will be resubmitted to the Journal of Linguistic Anthropology in September 2022

127



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
2018, 40). Although political autonomy was indeed a springboard for
discourses of linguistic emancipation for Norwegian speakers after years of
Danish control, Norway’s Indigenous populations themselves were made to
decades undergo cultural assimilation through various instruments of the state
and were politically disenfranchised for just as long for the sake of
sociocultural integration into the mainstream Norwegian population
(Viinikka-Kallinen 2019, 13). Such developments reflect trends in the ethnic
nationalist trajectories in many other European and colonial nation-states
created during the 1800s (Huss & Lindgren 2011, 9).
Proposals to “Norwegianise” written Danish (an approach which
resulted in Bokmål) were rejected by some prominent scholars and politicians,
as Norway’s broad dialect continuum and rural populations served as one of
several foundations for Norway’s newfound Romantic-era identity (Hanto
2016, 142) and as a marker of authentic distinctive Norwegian-ness in the
context of Norway’s forced political union with Sweden after 1814 (Sandøy
2018, 214). After the end of a long union between Denmark-Norway, and in
amongst the political energy of early nationalist discourses and resolve to
assert an autonomous linguistic identity, the son of a peasant farmer in the
west of Norway, Ivar Aasen (1813-1896), travelled around the country to
gather notes on the dialects and their structural origins in earlier Norwegian
and Old Norse. Aasen’s “Landsmaal” proposals for a new standard were
elaborated upon by its early adopters who would incorporate further rural and
working-class dialects, culminating in today’s Nynorsk written standard (Jahr
2014, 53ff).
The contemporary Nynorsk movement is known as målrørsla
(language/dialect/tongue-movement),

associated

with

counter-cultural

efforts to resist dialect shift and elitist spoken standards, and promote Nynorsk
in public life, mass media, and the education system (Grepstad 2006, 125;
128



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
Torp & Vikør 2014, 296-7). For the early Nynorsk movement, Nynorsk was
utilised as a “cultural object” to represent a revitalised Norwegian identity in
political discourse (Sandøy 2018, 215), and in the mid-20th century during the
so-called “dialect wave”, the slogan skriv nynorsk, snakk dialekt (‘write
Nynorsk, speak dialect’) represented the grassroots cause of contemporary
Nynorsk language activism (Almenningen 1981, 494) oriented around the
political symbolism of both Nynorsk and the spoken vernacular.
In this article, I present observations of Norsk Målungdom (Norwegian
Language Youth), a Nynorsk and dialect advocacy organisation whose
membership is under the age of 26. Since 2015, through my research as a
young foreign-born participant-observer of Norsk Målungdom, I have
witnessed how its members negotiate Sámi and Kven language concerns into
their wider pro-Nynorsk and pro-dialect campaigning. Alongside campaigns
against political centralisation and integration with the European Community,
solidarity with Norway’s minoritised language groups has some history within
the Nynorsk movement (consult Almenningen 1981 for the history of
målrørsla social campaigns), although I will draw attention to current-day
activism. Importantly, this is not a paper that presents research from within
the Indigenous context. Furthermore, this is a retrospective examination of
fieldwork where I had not set out to collect data specifically on Indigenous
languages. Instead, I present an analysis of how Sámi and Kven themes are
integrated into the Nynorsk activist metadiscourse, and how Norsk Målungdom
has engaged in Sámi and Kven language advocacy.
The social action and campaigning of young Nynorsk activists can also
be construed as solidarity work and advocacy for Norway’s Indigenous
languages. The implications of this reinforce the need to interpret language
activism through a more “fluid” perspective (De Korne 2021, 7) alongside
other ideas around participative “linguistic citizenship” (Stroud & Heugh
129



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
2014, 214, see also Gal & Irvine 2019, 14-17). Language activism can take
various forms and manifestations (Combs & Penfield 2012, 461-462), and
activity in Norsk Målungdom demonstrates that contemporary Nynorsk
language activism is not concerned solely with Nynorsk and Norwegian
dialects.

3.1.

Norway’s Indigenous languages and Norwegian

Norway’s continental territory extends from the southern tip of the
Scandinavian peninsula to the Arctic north, bordering with Swedish, Finnish,
and Russian state boundaries. The Sámi are a diverse cultural nation whose
land traditionally spreads across the north of Fennoscandia, whereas the Kven
people are constituted by a smaller, ethnically Finnish off-shoot traditionally
residing in a handful of municipalities in Norway’s far north. The north of
Fennoscandia has long been home to nomadic Sámi populations, and over
time, expansionist Scandinavian populations from the south would soon take
land, water, and institute formal political control over Sámi land, known as
Sápmi (see Kuhn 2020, vi). Most if not all Sámi people speak more than one
language (Nelson & Toivonen 2007, 2), and through major breakthroughs
such as the 1987 Sámi Law, the establishment of a Sámi Parliament (consult
Marten 2006), and various constitutional amendments, Norwegian and the
Sámi languages now have equal worth as national languages (Thingnes 2020,
6) in addition to the 2005 acknowledgement of Kven (kväänin kieli; see Lane
2011, also Viinikka-Kallinen 2019, 12).
Whilst Sámi is an Indigenous language of Norway, Kven is more
correctly a national minority language; both have differing status and legal
protections at the time of writing. Furthermore, Norway has ratified the
Indigenous and Tribal Peoples’ Convention and European Charter for Regional
or Minority Languages. Critical to the research context and ongoing political
130



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
sensitivities, a Norwegian Government “Truth Commission” was established in
2018 to investigate the historical treatment of Norway’s Indigenous people,
and a report is due in 2022 (Viinikka-Kallinen ibid, 14). Three Sámi languages
are recognised by the Norwegian state as official languages—Northern Sámi
(davvisámegiella),

Lule

Sámi

(julevsámegiella),

and

Southern

Sámi

(åarjelsaemien gïele)—with Northern Sámi being the largest used Sámi
language in Norway and a notable role in the linguistic landscape and
education system of Northern Norway (Thingnes 2019, 3). As with many
Indigenous peoples globally, Kven, Sámi and their descendants all live diverse
lives in various rural, coastal, town and city environments, and those who
claim ethnicity or adopt Sámi or Kven identity are not necessarily users of the
languages (cf. Putra 2018, 23).
Spoken Norwegian is characterised by marked dialectal diversity;
regional dialect use is widespread and enhanced through a range of legislative
policies and widespread public attitudes which encourage “dialect tolerance”
(Kulbrandstad 2018, 179). On paper, no one dialect is treated institutionally
as a spoken Norwegian standard, and even since 1878, pupils have had the
right to speak their dialect at school (consult Venås 1981). However, internal
migration, trends in social mobility and dialect levelling over the years have
all significantly reduced dialectal markedness in Norway: Norwegian language
is not entirely idiolectal nor heterogeneous, nor is it a true “dialect paradise”
(consult Røyneland & Mæhlum 2009). Both Nynorsk and Bokmål are
underpinned by a range of ideological, aesthetic, and stylistic approaches as
to how Norwegian should be written, regulated by the Language Council of
Norway (Språkrådet) through regular spelling reforms (rettskrivingar;
Vangsnes 2018, 79ff).
Users of both Nynorsk and Bokmål can register their choice of written
language when communicating with state organs (Jahr 2014, 167). School
131



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
demographics allow us to estimate that a stable 15% of the Norwegian
population—approximately

600,000

people—primarily

uses

Nynorsk

(Grepstad 2015, 52), with most residing in the less urban west and midlands.
Nynorsk’s continued use has been successful in part because of its adoption by
prominent Norwegian writers and being sustained through the arts. Norway
and its Bokmål-Nynorsk divide have long been a textbook case-study in
language policy and planning since the seminal work of Einar Haugen (19061994) and later contemporaries have continued to examine the dynamics
around Norway’s language ideological debates (Bull 2007, 124-126, see also
Bucken-Knapp 2003; Puzey 2011).

3.2.

Research context

Nynorsk is used by a minority of the Norwegian population, and Nynorsk users
often feel pressured to use Bokmål (Thingnes 2020, 4-5) and will often report
experiences of their linguistic choices not being respected or understood as
writing in Nynorsk has become a “marked choice” (Berezkina 2018, 63). As a
minority language, Nynorsk is the site of a prominent language activist
movement. Nynorsk activists have historically been characterised as a
collective of “students, school teachers and peasants” (Hanto 2016, 141),
engaged in charged, ever-present language debates in Norwegian public life.
Nynorsk has never been used by the majority of the country and attempts to
make it the single written standard of Norwegian have been abandoned by the
activist mainstream. In particular, the organisations Noregs Mållag (Norwegian
Language Society, founded 1906) and Norsk Målungdom (Norwegian
Language Youth, founded 1961) are the largest to engage in modern-day
Nynorsk and dialect advocacy and share an office in Oslo.
Norsk Målungdom is a newer group in the comparatively longer history
of Nynorsk activism; the earlier målrørsla was decentralised and different
132



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
interests were traditionally represented by specific interest groups such as
book publishers and folk culture organisations (Almenningen 1992, 99). Both
groups today rally for the right to use Nynorsk, encourage the use of dialects
in public life, and, at different times throughout their modern history, engage
in wider campaigns including Sámi and Kven initiatives.
The

relationship

between

language,

identity

and

nation

in

contemporary Norway has often provided “a powerful stimulus for political
differences and political action” (Aarebrot & Urwin 1979, 80). Consequently,
Nynorsk has symbolic weight in various social debates, and a classic example
of this has been the involvement of Nynorsk activists in opposition to
membership of the European Community and Union where Nynorsk
ideologies of anti-centralisation and anti-Americanisation coincided with
Eurosceptic narratives (consult Vikør 1981; Torp & Vikør 2014, 226). The
1960s and 1970s were also a busy period for young Nynorsk activists, who
were also engaged with campaigns to demand Nynorsk textbooks in schools
and protests with farmers in nationwide demonstrations (Almenningen 1992:
180).
One recent example of where the contemporary work of Norsk
Målungdom and Indigenous language topics coincide is a column written by
its then leiar (chairperson), Gunnhild Skjold, in the December 2020 issue of
the members’ magazine of Noregs Mållag. Commenting on an on-going
government consultation about introducing official names of the Kingdom of
Norway in Kven and the three varieties of Sámi, Skjold writes:
“Ved å vedta fleire offisielle namn på Noreg syner ein fram at Noreg
er eit fleirspråkleg samfunn. Det er også eit gode for dei av oss som
ikkje brukar kvensk eller dei samiske språka sjølv, og spesielt for oss
nynorskbrukarar. Ved å vise fram alle språka i Noreg, skapar ein
133



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
også høgare aksept for språkmangfaldet, og med det for
nynorsken.”
[By approving more official names for Norway, we demonstrate that
Norway is a multilingual society. It’s also a good thing for those of
us who don’t use Kven or the Sámi languages ourselves, and
especially for us Nynorsk-users. By showing all the languages in
Norway, we also create increased acceptance for linguistic diversity,
and therefore, for Nynorsk.]
(Skjold, Gunnhild. 2021. “Landet vårt er meir enn Noreg og
Norge”, Norsk Tidend #5, p. 24)
The title of Skjold’s piece—“Our country is more than Noreg and
Norge”—reframes a long-standing discrepancy between Bokmål and Nynorsk,
where each has their own spelling for “Norway” (Nynorsk Noreg, Bokmål
Norge). The representation of official names and translations on signage and
documents in both Nynorsk and Bokmål has featured considerably within the
history of the Norwegian language struggle (Puzey 2009, 58ff; Puzey 2016,
169). For Indigenous languages too, such as Sámi, naming initiatives are a
form of cultural revitalisation and resistance; an attempt by communities and
allies to decolonise the linguistic landscape (Cocq 2017, 102-8). Skjold draws
on a familiar discourse of names and signage and employs a strategy where
her activism is framed to encompass the concerns of other language
communities. Namely, invoking “linguistic diversity” within Norway’s
“multilingual society” relates the treatment of Nynorsk-users to that of
Indigenous communities and their languages. “Showing all the languages in
Norway” is presented as an objective that will lead to more “acceptance” for
linguistic diversity, which benefits Nynorsk.

134



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
My studies of Norsk Målungdom and Noregs Mållag as a foreign observer
in the 21st century highlight examples where the Indigenous languages of
Norway feature more prominently in the discourse of younger Nynorsk
activists. How this is constructed and understood amongst young Nynorsk
activists will be examined in this article through discourse-oriented content
analyses of ethnographic data and semi-structured interviews.

3.3.

Linguistic ethnography and language activism

In recent research, language activism has been a focal point of critical enquiry
in linguistic anthropology and sociolinguistics which examines the role of
language as a tool for social justice (Putra 2018; Avineri et al. 2019), speaker
agency in language change/variation/shift (Heller & Duchêne 2016; Schwartz
2018; Keller 2019), and how language varieties have become the centre of
significant revitalisation and cultural reclamation processes in the postcolonial
context (Albury & Carter 2018). If examining language activism as a “linguistic
practice” (see Moustaoui 2018, 533ff), activists rely on the use of
argumentation which is rooted in “ideological models” which together
construct activist discourses around identity or solidarity/opposition with
other groups (García 2009, 82; Dołowy-Rybińska 2018, 5). In my work, I
examine language activism as a dynamic space for discourse construction with
multiple actors. The objective is to observe who language activists are, how
activism is discursively performed, and therefore, how activism is agentive in
the construction of language ideologies. These observations are analysed and
contextualised through an informed observational perspective (Crang & Cook
2007, 15; Madden 2017, 76).
My research is concerned with how language and linguistic topics are
talked about in public discourse; linguistic practices and named language
varieties can have complex meaning with wider cultural/political associations,
135



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
and this can be analysed by considering the varying perspectives of different
“culturally embedded speaker[s]” (Irvine & Gal 2008, 78, also Irvine & Gal
2009, 426). The social action that language activism represents is one example
of where language ideological narratives are continually recast in the public
arena (Kymlicka 2001, 27-8; Edwards 2006, 18), with both formally and
informally situated participants.
From this angle, language activism need not be considered the domain
of specific people or organisations. Activists “can be anyone and people of all
ages” (Putra 2018, 102) and activism is essentially openly participative (cf.
Stroud 2001); it neither need be rooted in political apparatus or the
production of tangible legal texts or formal policies. This means that discourse
and related linguistic practices can become markedly meaningful, construed
as activist social action by wider society; the behaviour of a linguistic subject
can represent either the continuity or rupture of language ideology.
Importantly, political/cultural affiliations are performed in and out of formally
organised spaces and a less essentialised and more fluid definition of activism
offers a lens embracing the complexity of participation in sociolinguistic
discourse.
I take this approach as part of adopting a theoretical reappraisal of the
individual/the linguistic subject when engaging with sociolinguistic discourse.
All subjects, including linguists despite their desire for impartiality and
objective analyses of language (consult Rymes & Leone 2014), are potential
stakeholders in language ideological debates (Errington 2003, 723ff; Combs
& Penfield 2012, 469), and linguistic behaviour is embedded in social
structures that can both restrict and enable the capacity to use language with
meaningful implications. In reality, linguistic discourse occurs in vivid
ideological spaces, and there is no such thing as the “sociopolitically
disinterested language user” (Kroskrity 2004, 501), linguistics should not treat
136



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
language as a politically neutral phenomenon (Pujolar 2007, 144), and
societal talk about language is never free from its contextualising ideologies
(Coupland & Jaworski 1998, 37).

3.4.

Data collection and analysis

My data comprise collections of ethnographic jottings and photographs since
2015, excerpts from three semi-structured interviews in 2019, public social
media posts by Norsk Målungdom, and various materials produced by Noregs
Mållag and Norsk Målungdom (2015-2020). The artefacts I draw on exhibit
explicit language attitudes and ideological statements, which are examined as
sites of activist metadiscourse. This discourse is part of an evolving cultural
continuity,

and

ethnographic

research

allows

the

researcher-as-

participant/observer to present an informed “thick description” of the data in
a given time and context (Richards 2005, 50, see also Gilmore 2011, 125; Bell
2016, 395ff), generating hypotheses, and offering possible explanations that
can be re-evaluated by future research. My analytical approach hybridises
ethnographic data collection and qualitative interviews; I focus on what
language activists say and do in tandem, and how this relates to the wider
cultural trajectory of their movement.
Through ethnographic research, one can identify how social context can
impact the meaning of the way a language is used to begin with (Meek 2011,
x-xi). I descriptively analyse data to highlight the construction of activist
narratives and themes in ideological discourse by examining metalanguage in
context. Therefore, metapragmatic analysis (see Duranti 2009, 16, also
Karlander 2017 in extenso), is one qualitative and anthropologically situated
method for examining how such discourses are constructed, based on the
premise that linguistic practices can “feed into” circulating ideologies about
(a) language (Verschueren 1998, 65). Language is not used simply to
137



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
communicate propositions; meaning can be “distorted” (Hodge & Cress 1993,
6) and can reflect a range of cultural narratives (Lucy 1993, 17), or “rhetorics”
(Schwartz 2018, 334ff) which legitimise broader sociopolitical claims.

3.5.

Positionality and ethics

I was raised as a monolingual English speaker in the south of England and
moved to Scotland in 2013 at the age of 18 to study Norwegian and
Linguistics. I decided to use Nynorsk halfway through my degree, and thanks
to an Erasmus exchange year in 2015 I was able to study at the University of
Oslo and observe the Nynorsk movement in my free time by participating in
Norsk Målungdom events. It is highly uncommon for non-native speakers of
Norwegian to use Nynorsk, exemplified at one point by my being interviewed
on Norwegian national radio in 2015 to explain my decision. At one point I
was also a committee member of the Oslo student Nynorsk society
(Studentmållaget i Oslo). As such, my Nynorsk use and my Nynorsk research
interests all position me as an advocate of Nynorsk, and there is also activism
within my research as I give activists a voice through my work for an
international readership.
It is important to state that my relationship with the Nynorsk movement
has developed over time to become less directly participative and more
institutionalised and distanced as I have entered postgraduate research.
However, my experiences over several years provide a valuable insideroutsider view of contemporary Nynorsk activism; Norsk Målungdom is an
organisation I have contributed to and have volunteered for, and outwith the
constraints of the ongoing pandemic, I make return visits to Norway several
times a year to attend residential events and give talks. These experiences have
allowed me to monitor trends in strategy and focus, as well as see which
individuals within the organisation take on leadership roles over time.
138



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
The focus on Sámi and Kven within Norsk Målungdom, and the
implications this has on the themes and activities within contemporary
Nynorsk activism, is one of these trends. In presenting observational and
interview-based data, this is sketched out from the perspective of my own
ethnography. Full names are used alongside interview participants, with their
explicit written approval, in accordance with the ethics approval system of the
University of Edinburgh (PPLS). This data, however, does not engage with the
trajectory of Sámi and Kven language activism due to my wider project being
focused just on the language activism of the Nynorsk movement.

3.6.

Analysis: “mål” means language

My first major interaction with Norsk Målungdom occurred at the start of 2015
whilst as an exchange student in Oslo. My own decision to “switch” to Nynorsk
from Bokmål caught the attention of an online Nynorsk magazine aimed at
young people, whose feature on me led to an invitation from Norsk Målungdom
to give a talk about the sociolinguistics of Scots and Gaelic at their annual
“Haustkonferanse” (Autumn Conference). Over the course of a weekend in
October 2015, this “conference” took the form of a two-night sleepover at a
high school in the town of Spydeberg, comprising talks from guest speakers,
campaigning workshops held by members, playing board games, having
meals, singing songs, and having a raffle. This experience was also the first
time I met several prominent faces within Norsk Målungdom. As with my own
presentation, the Autumn Conference featured talks that were favourably
engaged with other minority sociolinguistic contexts: for example, another
talk discussed the minority Elfdalian/Övdalsk language of Sweden.
Discussion of Sámi was featured at the Autumn Conference. Gunnhild
Skjold, gave a presentation that touched on the politics of Sámi signage in her
home region. Referring to her experiences as a resident, she drew on
139



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
newspaper headlines and public discourse referring to instances where some
prominent individuals appeared hostile to Sámi language plans for the city.
Both of our talks were an exercise in reflection on the linguistic diversity
around us, framed by the ideological reflexes of Nynorsk and empathetically
supportive of minoritised linguistic communities. During my interactions with
Norsk Målungdom, I gauged that the use of conferences and residentials
offered opportunities for the organisation to engage with its membership and
provide a social remit for young people with an interest in Nynorsk and
dialects, yet this appears to have been conceptually extended to language
generally.
As an integral part of the name of the Nynorsk and dialect organisations
I have investigated (mållag, målungdom), “mål” in Norwegian can correspond
with English “tongue” or “dialect”, and the term is employed by the Nynorsk
movement frequently to represent the objectives of Nynorsk to reflect the
variety of Norwegian spoken dialects and how Nynorsk has symbolically
represented an ideological initiative to protect and curate them (see
Almenningen 1992, 99; Brunstad 2017, 77). However, over time I have judged
that younger activists are somewhat more engaged with “mål” being used
beyond Nynorsk and dialects. At times, this liberal interpretation of “mål” is
rather explicit. At their 2015 Annual General Meeting, Norsk Målungdom
adopted official names in Kven (Norjan Kielinuoret) and the three main Sámi
languages (Vuona Giellanuora, Nöörjen Gïelenoerh, Norgga Giellanuorat).
Later on, committee member Fredrik Hope reported on this decision in the
organisation’s newsletter:
“På landsmøtet i Oslo vart det fatta mange vedtak, og eit av dei meir
historiske vedtaka var namn på tre samiske språk og kvensk. […]
Norsk Målungdom [er ikkje berre] ein organisasjon for nynorsk. Det
140



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
er sjølvsagt nynorsken som er hovudsaka vår, men me er òg ein
organisasjon for språkleg mangfald jamt over. Sett i ljos av dette
vart det rettast å velja omsetjingar som fekk fram at mål tyder
språk.”
[At the AGM in Oslo there were many decisions taken, and one of
the most historical decisions was adopting names in three Sámi
languages and Kven. […] The Norwegian Language Youth [is not
just] an organisation for Nynorsk. Of course, Nynorsk is our
principal concern, but we are also an organisation for linguistic
diversity everywhere. In light of this, we made sure we chose
translations which made it clear that mål means language.]
(Hope, Fredrik. 2015. “Ikkje berre Norsk Målungdom – ikkje berre
nynorsk”, Motmæle #77, 2015)
Hope sets out that Nynorsk takes focus in Norsk Målungdom, but the remit
of the organisation’s activities and outreach need not stop at Nynorsk. “Mål”
has a wider meaning in practice: its scope can extend to all language. This
positions Norsk Målungdom as an organisation for “linguistic diversity
everywhere”, in consideration of Norway’s broader multilingualism. Following
the successful adoption of this motion, several Målungdom-affiliated student
societies collectively proposed a similar motion to the 2016 Annual General
Meeting of Noregs Mållag. This explanation was given in the delegate pack:
“[Noregs Mållag bør] vera blant dei fyrste til å visa solidaritet med
samar og kvenar når språka deira vert pressa. Så er det klart at i det
daglege arbeidet til Noregs Mållag får nynorsken og dialektane det
meste av merksemda. […]

141



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
Samstundes er ikkje det til hinder for at Mållaget tek visse
prinsipielle, språkpolitiske standpunkt som er gyldige utover vårt
eige tilfelle, og at me viser solidaritet med andre små og
mellomstore språk. [...] Framleggsstillarane meiner det er på tide å
synleggjera denne politikken, både internt i Mållaget og utetter i
samfunnet […]”
[(Noregs Mållag ought to) be amongst the first to show solidarity
with Sámi and Kven people when their languages are being
suppressed. Indeed, it is also clear that Nynorsk and dialects should
get most of the attention in the every-day work of Noregs Mållag.
[…]
At the same time, this doesn’t prevent the Mållag from taking
specific principal language political stances which are applicable
beyond our own situation and showing solidarity with other small
and medium-sized languages. (…) The proposers believe that it is
time to visually demonstrate this policy both within the Mållag and
in wider society (…)]
(Noregs Mållag 2016 Landsmøte, ‘Sakshefte’, p. 34-5)
The motion passed: Noregs Mållag now has names in Kven (Norjan
Kielijoukko) and the Sámi languages (Vuona Giellasiebrre, Nöörjen
Gïelesiebrie, Norgga Giellasearvi). I was in attendance as a delegate to witness
the motion passing with acclaim, following several speeches in favour from
younger delegates in the hall during the debate. Both the motion text above
and speeches at the AGM reinforced the premise that other minority languages
in Norway were being “suppressed” and that the organisation could do more
to express solidarity whilst not detracting from the “every-day [Nynorsk and
dialect] work” of Noregs Mållag. Conceptually, “mål” does not have to
142



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
necessarily refer to the diversity of Norwegian dialects but to linguistic
variation universally (cf. Hoel 2001, 39-40), and this becomes a rhetorical
starting point for activists to engage in solidarity with other language
communities. Nynorsk is positioned as a minority language—amongst other
“small and medium-sized languages”—and has common cause with other
minoritised language varieties within the Norwegian context.
Engaging in a form of solidarity and allyship, the Nynorsk movement
does not have to be a single-issue cause and can extend its mål-focus to the
minoritised languages of other communities in Norway. I interpret this as part
of the construction of a “linguistic diversity” ideology, where terms such as
“språkmangfald” or “språkleg mangfald” (“language/linguistic diversity”) are
consistently used to talk positively and empathetically about other minoritised
languages, at times even intervening in public debates to defend Sámi and
Kven language initiatives. Importantly, Nynorsk discourses about “linguistic
diversity” have been traditionally rooted in an earlier ideology where Nynorsk
represents tolerance for Norwegian dialects as a written unifier (see Hellevik
2001, 123). A newer interpretation of “linguistic diversity” was used rather
enthusiastically in a Norsk Målungdom Facebook post to report on the approval
of the naming motion:
“Me er veldig kry av at Noregs Mållag gjorde som me gjorde i fjor,
og vedtok namn på samisk og kvensk på #nmlm. Endå meir kry er
me av dei dyktige studentmållaga våre, som kom med framlegget
og fekk heile landsmøtesalen med seg. Fram for språkmangfaldet!”
[We are very proud that Noregs Mållag did as we did last year and
took on names in Sámi and Kven at #nmlm. We’re even more proud
of our capable student language societies who proposed the motion
and got the whole hall’s support. Forward with linguistic diversity!]
143



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
Facebook post, sharing an NRK Nyheter article about the Noregs
Mållag AGM (@norskmalungdom, 19 April 2016)
“Forward with linguistic diversity!” is an overt statement of ideological
direction for Norsk Målungdom, who also appear in their post to claim
responsibility for the motion being passed. This would suggest that younger
Nynorsk activists are attempting to spearhead concern, advocacy, and
solidarity with Norway’s Indigenous language communities within the wider
Nynorsk movement, to a degree. Such activity has developed in other
campaigns; namely, issues surrounding public signage and schooling. In
November 2015, Norsk Målungdom sent out a press release and several social
media posts in reaction to a municipal decision to close a Sámi language school
in Aarborte/Hatfjelldal, one of the last few Norwegian communities with
Southern Sámi speakers:
“Sørsamisk er eit truga språk som treng satsing – ikkje kutt.
Regjeringa ynskjer å leggje ned Sameskolen i Midt-Noreg, ein av få
skular som gjev undervising i sørsamisk. I staden bør partia på
Stortinget leggje til rette for at fleire kommunar skiltar på
sørsamisk, syte for fleire sørsamiske læremiddel og gje dei
sørsamiske institusjonane økonomisk armslag slik at dei kan satse
for framtida.”
[Southern Sámi is a threatened language which needs investment –
not cuts. The government wishes to close the Sámi school in MidNorway, one of few schools offering education in Southern Sámi.
Instead, parliamentary parties need to make sure that more
municipalities put up signage in Southern Sámi, get more Southern

144



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
Sámi educational materials and give Southern Sámi institutions
economic support so they can invest for the future.]
(Facebook post, sharing a framtida.no article with statement from
Fredrik Hope, @norskmalungdom, 2 November 2015)
As a young person’s organisation with school-age members, it is
understandable that Norsk Målungdom is concerned with school language
policy as a day-to-day issue; much of their outreach and membership drives
are facilitated by invitations to visit high schools to talk to pupils across
Norway about Nynorsk, dialects, Norwegian language history, as well as
remind pupils that they have the right to use Nynorsk. On this specific
occasion, they have used their online platform to raise awareness of an
Indigenous language issue. The statement asks for the government decision to
be reversed on account of the severely threatened status of Southern Sámi,
framed by further policy demands, such as more signage in the local
Indigenous language and supporting schools with more didactic materials in
Southern Sámi, all of which resonate with their own priorities for how the
state should treat Nynorsk and Nynorsk-users.
On other occasions since my observations began in 2015, Norsk
Målungdom has used social media to display enthusiasm for Sámi and Kven
events and to celebrate when other organisations and groups adopt names in
Norway’s Indigenous languages; some posts on Instagram are a continuation
of a campaign titled “Fleirspråkleg framtid” (multilingual future, see Figure 1)
coinciding with the theme of the first “Haustkonferanse” I attended in 2015:

145



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’

Figure 1: Selection of Sámi/Kven-related Instagram posts from Norsk
Målungdom (@malungdom)
(top left) “We are marking Sámi language week!” (21 October 2019)
(top right) “Today we are celebrating the Day of the Kven people!” (16 March 2019)
(bottom left) “Hooray for the Labour Party Youth, who this weekend adopted official names in Nynorsk,
Northern Sami and Kven!” (22 October 2018)
(bottom right) “Everyone has the right to know their own mother tongue, be it one or more.” (13 June 2018)

146



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’

As part of my doctoral fieldwork before the 2020 Coronavirus
pandemic, I was able to travel to Oslo in 2019 to conduct semi-structured
interviews with five different members of Norsk Målungdom as well as a
member of staff in Noregs Mållag. Whilst I am unable to provide a full synopsis
of all six transcripts, there were a few occasions where the meaning and use
of “mål” and “språkmangfald” were discussed with some of my participants. It
would appear that the conceptual meaning of “mål” appears to remain a
matter of open interpretation in the wider Nynorsk movement. In conversation
with Svein Soldal Eggerud, the nestleiar (deputy chair) of Norsk Målungdom,
I asked whether he was a language activist and whether older activists in
Noregs Mållag would call themselves a “språkaktivist” (language activist).
Eggerud responded by saying that he is a language activist, but older folk
within the wider Nynorsk movement may have different perspectives.
“Språkaktivist” is a label that can carry meanings that contrast with what “mål”
has historically meant in målrørsla:
Eggerud: Ja, dette er meg som spekulerer litt då, men eg trur kanskje det er
nokre som ikkje ville vore heilt komfortabel med, eller ikkje visste
heilt kva det låg i den merkelappen [språkaktivist]. For dei ville
kanskje berre kalla seg for målmann eller målkvinne, og at det var
implisert at det var nynorsk dei jobba med. Men når eg kallar meg
for språkaktivist, så inkluderer eg på ein måte synet om at eg ikkje
berre jobbar eg for nynorsk, men alle, og for at alle språk har livets
rett. Ein skal ha toleranse og respekt for andre språk.
[Yes, this is me speculating a little, but I think maybe some people
wouldn’t be completely comfortable with or wouldn’t know exactly
what that label [language activist] meant. As they would rather just
147



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
call themselves målmann or målkvinne, and it would be implied that
it was Nynorsk they were working with. But when I call myself a
language activist, I include in a way a view that I am not just
working for Nynorsk, but everyone, and for that all languages have
a right to life. You should have tolerance and respect for other
languages.]
Understanding that the mid-20th-century activism of the Nynorsk
movement had been campaigning for societal tolerance of Norway’s dialectal
diversity (the “dialect wave”, snakk dialekt, skriv nynorsk, etc.), Eggerud’s
contemporary stance appears to have broadened this position by appealing to
“tolerance and respect for other languages”. Eggerud explains that
“språkaktivist” might be too wide in scope for some Nynorsk activists in Noregs
Mållag (who may prefer being called mål-man or mål-woman), whereas he
conceptualises his own activism as more than a focus on Nynorsk in contrast
with the older generation of activists. However, Eggerud’s characterisation of
the older activist stance should not necessarily be dismissed. Earlier that week,
in one interview with a long-standing employee of Noregs Mållag (Ingar
Arnøy), I had noted that Norwegian “mål” could be differentiated from other
types of “språk”. As with Eggerud, I asked Arnøy whether he is a
“språkaktivist”:
Arnøy:

Altså, eg er jo målaktivist, ja.
[So, I am actually a mål-activist, yes.]

Int.:

Målaktivist?
[Mål-activist?]

Arnøy:

Ja, det er jo ikkje det same som språkaktivist.
[Yes, it’s not really the same as language activist.]
148



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
Int.:

Nei.
[No.]

Arnøy:

For ein språkaktivist det kan jo mange vere, altså det kan det jo, ja,
teiknspråkaktivist, døvespråk, altså, eller kort og godt ein som
ønsker at det er språkglede skal du seie. Og, så, det er jo mange
typar av, altså, av språkaktivisme. Målaktivisme er jo spesifikt for
oss da. Men det er klart, eg er jo sjølvsagt ein språkaktivist òg, ja,
det er eg jo.
[Because many people could be a language activist, so it can, yes,
sign-language activist, Deaf-language, so in short anyone who wants
there to be joy through language, let’s say. And so, there are of
course many types of, basically, of language activism. Mål-activism
is really specific for us. But clearly, I am of course a language activist
as well, of course I am.]

The contradictory admission that “of course [he is] a language activist”,
directly after stating that he was not, undercovers again wider, active
conceptual associations between a targeted defined “mål” and a wider “språk”.
“Mål” clearly has a specific, marked, Nynorsk-oriented meaning to Arnøy,
despite acknowledging its conceptual links to “språk”. One can draw from his
statement that “mål” is conceptually unique, although his comments also
suggest that the distinction between “mål” and “språk” is a question of
practical focus on the local context rather than a rejection of being associated
with other language issues. Although Arnøy did not compare Nynorsk activism
with Indigenous language advocacy, he drew in other forms of language—
other forms of minority languages, specifically sign languages—against which
his “mål-activism” can be compared.

149



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
Finally, I was able to speak with Gunnhild Skjold, and ask what Norsk
Målungdom aims to do when interacting with other minority language
communities. By reflecting on the language activist organisations that exist in
Scotland, I asked her if it is important for activists within Norsk Målungdom to
engage in work in solidarity. In response, she replied that it is a “tids- og
kapasitetsspørsmål” (question of time and capacity), but that her organisation
does set out to work alongside other language groups:
Skjold:

Og det står også i statuttane til målungdommen, altså våre prinsippprogram, grunnlagsdokument og kva skal ein seie […] jo, at vi skal
søke solidaritet med andre språkorganisasjonar. Og vi jobbar jo
mykje med, i Noreg då, ikkje berre med nynorsk, men også med å
støtte kvensk, støtte samisk, støtte andre språkgrupper i Noreg. Og
den same tanken, den her språkmangfaldstanken som vi legg til
grunn for arbeidet vårt.
[And it also says in the statutes of the Målungdom, basically our
policy documents, our founding documents, what to say […] yes,
that we will look for solidarity with other language organisations.
And we work a lot with, in Norway, not just with Nynorsk, but also
with supporting Kven, supporting Sámi, supporting other language
groups in Norway. And the same idea, this idea of linguistic diversity
which we base our work on.]

The last sentence of this excerpt refers to Norsk Målungdom having an
“idea of linguistic diversity”, which suggests that the use of this term in their
activism is an explicit and intentional act. Her statement reinforces the
development of Nynorsk activism into a venture which “supports” other
language issues, and that this is grounded in an appreciation of Norway’s
150



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
contemporary multilingualism. On wider reflection of the historical trajectory
of the Nynorsk movement, the incorporation of Norway’s Indigenous
languages represents a significant difference from the original ideologies that
underpinned Norway’s National Romantic period. As a Nynorsk organisation,
Norsk Målungdom has instituted a more ideologically sensitive role, and as
shown in other examples, this is carried out to some extent in their activism
and through internal outreach within the wider Nynorsk movement.
Before summarising, I should first state that the examples I have
described are not exhaustive of the entire relationship between Norsk
Målungdom and Sámi/Kven language issues, as I have only set out to
retrospectively analyse a complex set of data where my attention was not
principally drawn to Indigenous themes. Nevertheless, by drawing on some
examples of organisational activity as well as one-on-one interviews, I will
have demonstrated that “mål” has a dynamic range of meanings and does shift
to and from Nynorsk-centred ideologies. Some Nynorsk activists—and
primarily younger activists in Norsk Målungdom—have elaborated on the
dynamism of Nynorsk activism and its metadiscourses by constructing
ideological narratives which operationalise the minority status and wider civil
society societal concern for minoritised languages such as Sámi and Kven. Talk
about “language/linguistic diversity” reinforces an ideological discourse that
Nynorsk and dialects form part of a diverse linguistic space, and that Nynorsk
activism consequently can intersect with initiatives to promote and defend
Sámi and Kven language interests.

3.7.

Discussion and conclusion: more than Noreg and Norge

Within the unique sociolinguistic context of two standard orthographies of the
same Norwegian language and the frequent use of broad dialects in social life,
the målrørsla has traditionally fronted the simultaneous defence of both
151



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
Nynorsk and the Norwegian language’s dialectal diversity. Historically,
Norwegian dialectal diversity has been operationalised as a cultural symbol to
construct linguistic identity through dialectal idiosyncrasy, and the ideological
foundations for this—and emergence of the Norwegian mål-movement—were
not initially grounded in an ideology that encompassed other ethnolinguistic
groups. Nevertheless, the discourse of contemporary Nynorsk language
activism appears dynamic and can embed wider opposition to cultural
hegemony through a celebration of modern linguistic diversity. Younger
activists appear engaged in a rhetorical broadening of what is meant by “mål”
(dialect/tongue/language) and “språkmangfald” (linguistic diversity) as terms
in extant activist metalanguage. Active metapragmatic awareness allows
activists to reframe these terms and rally behind Indigenous language issues,
despite this not being their main organisational focus.
Engaging in a positive discourse about linguistic diversity and
multilingualism is a strategy in language maintenance efforts, especially in the
context of language revitalisation (see Wurm 2014, 15-17) where
governments, non-governmental organisations and minority language
advocates attempt to develop arguments that legitimise the institution of
lesser-used language varieties by drawing on the educational/cognitive utility
(see Havas & Vulchanova 2018) and socioeconomic value of linguistic
diversity (see de Bres 2014). That Nynorsk activists have become engaged
with Indigenous language issues as a matter of broader “språkleg mangfald”
(linguistic diversity)—through signage campaigns, by supporting Indigenous
language schools, demanding that Sámi and Kven names be instituted at both
government and grassroots level, through raising awareness internally—is
also not too surprising on wider reflection of the ideological radicalism of
Nynorsk which, in this current context, envelopes some Indigenous themes
(see Piller 2016, 29ff, cf. Kuhn 2020, xii).
152



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
The cases I bring forward suggest that within the younger Nynorsk
activist community, the ideology of Nynorsk as representative of a campaign
for “linguistic diversity” is continually recast to incorporate an ideologically
modern concern for Indigenous languages to better reflect Norway’s
multilingualism and build a coalition of solidarity (cf. Smith 1995, 18; Huss &
Lindgren 2011, 10). As a historic platform of counter-cultural struggle and
resistance against cultural hegemony, Nynorsk activists—more specifically,
younger activists—have campaigned for minority issues that exist outside of
the purview of traditional narratives about Nynorsk and its activist movement;
in other words, the Nynorsk movement is not just about Nynorsk (cf. Allardt
1984, 197-8), something that has been exemplified before through activists’
engagement in various political campaigns in the past (Torp & Vikør 2014,
226). It is expected that language activists engage in different activities and
discourses as a matter of reinforcing their own ideological cause, and whilst
such behaviour is not uncommon (Combs & Penfield 2012: 473), it is underresearched.
I would posit that these activists are likely engaging in “emotional
divestment” from traditionally more ethnocentric ideologies (Giles 2019,
259); younger activists are more attuned to how minorities had been
systematically problematised by past governments and systemic, ideological
exclusion (Heller & Duchêne 2016, 142; Fleming & Ansaldo 2020, 4), and now
demonstrate “political will” as civil society to address institutionalised
discrimination (Viinikka-Kallinen 2019, 14-15), even if through symbolic
gesture politics (cf. Cincotta 2008, 357-9). It is appropriate to say that this
performative allyship is demonstrably self-serving for Nynorsk activists; it
reinforces their own narrative about Nynorsk being a disenfranchised minority
language in need of societal and governmental support. Showing solidarity
with other language groups gives the Nynorsk movement some currency in
153



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
debates about language as part of the rhetorics of preservation and political
legitimation (see Blommaert 2011, 127; Perez-Milans & Soto 2016, 55).
However, at no point in engaging with Sámi and Kven discourses have I
witnessed these young Nynorsk activists intending to represent Indigenous
people’s interests; they are not taking the lead in Indigenous linguistic or wider
cultural reclamation (cf. Gresczyk 2011, 32). Norway’s Indigenous people will
continue their drive for cultural reclamation regardless of what Nynorsk
activists do in their own remit.
That being said, language scholars, linguists, and other engaged actors
such as activists should/will come to realise that their participation in
sociolinguistic discourses positions them as agents in the construction of
dominant language ideologies (Hornberger 2017, 162-3). As instituting Kven
and Sámi through language policy is not in itself a guarantor of use and
societal acceptance, the symbolism of top-down legislation is “meaningless
without institutional support” (Safran 2015, 259). Therefore, from their
position, with their platform as another language organisation, there is
enhanced awareness in Norsk Målungdom and the wider Nynorsk movement
of how their own language activism necessarily intersects with other minority
cultural efforts—specifically, languages like Sámi and Kven which have
institutional recognition already—and how gaining further recognition and
institutional use of minority languages is a collective common struggle (cf. Gal
2006, 17).
This article has shown that today’s young Nynorsk activists draw on
Norway’s other linguistic minorities within a narrative that espouses “linguistic
diversity”. They engage with nascent popular awareness of Norway’s
multilingual reality through Indigenous languages and also legitimate their
own ideological discourse through this narrative. One could interpret
discussion of other languages by Nynorsk activists merely as a passing interest
154



‘Mål’ means ‘språk’
or curiosity about other languages, although using this ethnographic work as
a springboard, I propose—alternatively—their engaged interest constitutes a
form of (supplementary) language activism. I have not presented these
observations to argue that Nynorsk activists are Sámi or Kven language
activists per se, but their activism does incorporate Sámi and Kven linguistic
objectives, and active allyship in multilingual contexts, such as this one, offers
important grounds for revaluating research traditions which discuss language
activism more rudimentarily as a unifocal concern with a specific language.
Further study would necessarily have to engage with how it may be
problematic that organisations within målrørsla—grounded historically on a
monolinguistic nationalist project—now engage with and embrace Indigenous
language diversity as a form of ‘multilingual turn’-inspired performative
allyship within the context of a minority language struggle.
In the postcolonial context, Norway’s sociolinguistic situation should be
viewed as more than a conceptual divide between a Bokmål Norge and a
Nynorsk Noreg when talking about Norwegian sociolinguistics (cf. Bull 2007,
139) as contemporary research now acknowledges Norway’s multilingual
reality beyond traditional talk about Norwegian dialect diversity and the
politics of Norwegian-specific language policy (see or example Røyneland &
Jensen 2020). Through critical applied approaches to linguistic research,
scholars are beginning to pay greater attention to who the participants in
sociolinguistic discourse are, and this article reflects this trend. As a
hypothesis-generating account of Nynorsk language activism, my findings
foster a more critical and nuanced treatment of language activism (and what
is meant by the term) universally and how activists and other social actors
work beyond focusing on specific language communities, or even language
itself.

155



Linguists, academia, and the legitimation of the Scots language
4.1.

Introduction

At the turn of the 19th century in Europe, conceptual associations between
nationality and linguistic identity fervently developed in various territories
and historical national communities, resulting in long-lasting ideologies about
nationhood, literacy, and social mobility. The effects of this historical turn
continue to permeate different discourses about national identity and cultural
belonging across Europe and beyond, especially where language indexicalises
a form of cultural and/or national differentiation. One can look to the
development of written standards for the Norwegian language following
independence from Denmark in 1814 (Bakke & Teigen 2001), the political
discourse between different named varieties of south-eastern Slavic in former
Yugoslavia (Ćalić 2018), or campaigns to give status to lesser-recognised
language varieties. Each of these examples illustrates how various
metadiscourses (social discourses about language; see Coupland & Jaworski
1998; Camps 2018) actively negotiate differing ideological stances in
dynamic, complex settings in an attempt to garner both conceptual acceptance
and institutional status of a language.
As a culturally regimented activity, the ideological conceptualisation of
a language is framed by not just individual behaviours in as much as they
represent the use of a given named language variety at a given point in time,
but also various symbolic institutions such as governments, cultural entities
and—as has been evident in the case of post-Romantic era Europe—
educational institutions due to their role in implementing policy goals such as
universal literacy (Kruse 2016). As such, dominant and emerging language
ideologies are reinforced, disputed, or torn down by a wide range of
contributing social actors—politicians, community leaders, activists—in
dynamic and ever-changing settings, where different language ideologies
represent active renegotiation of (a specific) language’s cultural capital as a
168



Linguists, academia, and the legitimation of the Scots language
symbolic resource. In turn, once-disputed languages may be instituted through
political and cultural apparatus such as legislation or educational policy (see
Jahr 2014 for a presentation of the case of modern Norwegian) and presumed
differentiation between named language varieties can be actively contested in
the public arena by different organisations and political groups (e.g.,
discourses around extending the use of the name Catalan to describe
Valencian or Balearic dialects; see Joan & Marí 2019). One understudied
example is the status and recognition of Scots in Scotland, its public figures,
advocates or activists, and the role of different contemporary institutions in
public discourse about the language today.28
Concerning the aims of this paper, I will present a metapragmatic
analysis of ethnographic observations at a Scots language symposium at the
University of Edinburgh in 2020, which I co-organised with other postgraduate
linguists and academic staff (described further in section four). Specifically, I
discuss how academic work around Scots necessarily engages with wider
language activism. One may position academics, including linguists, as
contributors in language activist communities of practice, since to engage in
public-facing talk about Scots—a language with disputed status and public
acceptance as a separate language—is to participate in a developing Scots
metadiscourse. In other words, to speak of Scots within academic settings as
a language contributes to processes of rhetorical and ideological legitimation
where Scots is framed a language in its own right.

28

By “Scots”, I refer to the west Germanic language variety called Scots, historically related
to Old English, and not Scottish Gaelic (a Goidelic Celtic language variety); see Lawson
2014b.

169



Linguists, academia, and the legitimation of the Scots language
4.2.

The Scots language before—and after—the turn of the

millennium
Scots represents not just Scotland’s administrative and intellectual past as an
independent kingdom with its distinct institutions, but also a language variety
with features preserved in the everyday spoken dialects of many communities
in Scotland. Since the 1707 Act of Union between Scotland and England, and
with political centralisation firmly rooted in England thereafter, standard
English has over time emerged as the dominant standard for schooling and
administration across Britain through a process of gradual Anglicisation (see
Barbour 2000; Lawson 2014b). As such, there has been a consistent
conceptual blur between Scots and (Scottish) English, not least due to the
historically documented existence of a Scots language providing an opportune
name to distinct vernacular Scottish speech (Lawson 2014b), but also the
complex evolution of speech varieties descended from Old English (including
dialects of Scots and English), and the relative mutual intelligibility between
them along a vernacular continuum between what is considered “Scots” and,
conversely, “English”.
Cultural fervour in the late 1800s and early 1900s gave rise to what has
been referred to as the “Scottish Renaissance”, in which various poets, fiction
writers and scholars recorded songs and folk tales in the vernacular tradition
of lowland Scotland, documenting Scots oral tradition (Corbett 1999; Bann &
Corbett 2015). This activity did not lead to the development of any instituted
Scots written or spoken standard besides proposals of literary standards such
as Lallans (see Murison 1977), although it did contribute to recognition of the
Scots language with regard to its use as a “creative medium” in the arts than
as a language of daily use, schooling, or administration (Lawson 2014a: 144-

170



Linguists, academia, and the legitimation of the Scots language
5).29 We see a continuation of Scots language documentation, revitalisation,
and advocacy in various cultural and political waves today, including the
updating of national dictionaries and continued documentation of dialectal
variation (see Aitken 1994; Wilson 2012). In amongst this work have been
various debates about the Scots language: not least what might be done to
differentiate it from English sufficiently in the popular imagination (Lawson
2014b), but also how it ought to be standardised, how we encompass regional
varieties of Scots which are considered distinct (for example “Doric”, see Leslie
2020), and how to know what constitutes “good” or “bad” Scots stylistically
or lexically (Kirk 1987: 69ff; see also Macafee 1994).

4.2.1. Contemporary use and the 2011 census

The

dynamics

of

contemporary

globalisation,

industrialisation

and

socioeconomic mobility have hampered the autonomy of Scots in the public
imagination as a separate language variety (cf. Eckert 2018: 17ff), and
continued political union as part of the United Kingdom caused a literary
language shift away from Scots and its own written conventions at the time
(known as “Scottis”, see Lawson 2014b: 5; compare developments in DanoNorwegian, see Janson 2018), yet continued efforts by other cultural
practitioners, politicians, authors and poets alike have maintained Scotland’s
linguistic distinctiveness in literary tradition and the spoken word,
“[advocating the] use [of Scots], [promoting] its survival and [pointing] to its
long and legitimate historical pedigree” as a marker of linguistic difference
and national identity (Jones 1995: 15). Furthermore, despite union with

29

However, the lack of an accepted Scots standard, and the multiple forms of written
expression in contemporary Scots writing may allow the language to be both radical and
“anti-national”; modern Scots is an exercise in opposition to remnant colonial ideologies
about language, centralisation of power, and homogenisation of cultural identity (see Giles
2019)

171



Linguists, academia, and the legitimation of the Scots language
England, many national institutions such as the Scottish church, education
system and legal system to this day have not been absorbed into any sort of
British amalgamation operated in London (cf. Orridge 1982).
However, despite ongoing political developments in the country,
including the independence campaign in addition to debates about the extent
of Scotland’s devolution settlement, the role of language and national culture
plays less of a significant role in discourse around national identity and
cultural autonomy when compared to other countries; only infrequently do
Scottish Gaelic or Scots come up as themes in debates about Scottish identity,
and debates often resort to a more nuanced discussion around the economics
of independence, as well as sustained differences of political opinion between
Scotland and the rest of the UK (Kruse 2016; Craig 2018). Notwithstanding
this historical context, recent developments in government policy have
brought Scots language themes to the fore of Scotland’s political institutions.
Since the reconvening of the Scottish Parliament in 1999 and the
establishment of the devolved Scottish Government, Scottish Gaelic, Scots,
and British Sign Language have been recognised as Scotland’s “other main
language groups”30, and both Scottish Gaelic and Scots are recognised as
indigenous languages of Scotland through the UK’s ratification of the European
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. The listing of these languages
together in publications has not led to any specific legal or material equity
between them, although by naming Scots as one of them, top-down
institutions such as the Scottish Government explicitly acknowledge the
language alongside other named language varieties. More than a decade has
passed since the government issued the 2011 national census which, for the

30

“Languages”: https://www.gov.scot/policies/languages/ - accessed 15 June 2022

172



Linguists, academia, and the legitimation of the Scots language
first time, asked respondents to report their abilities in Scots.31 Roughly 26%
of the population reported a speaking ability in Scots (see Macafee 2017). The
development of this census question had first and foremost followed out from
the recommendations published in a report by the Scottish Government’s 2009
Scots Language Working Group, in an attempt to determine various ways in
which the Scots language could be promoted through top-down initiatives and
have its status raised.
At the time of writing, we are awaiting the results of the 2022 national
census, which once again asks respondents about their Scots language skills.32
However, with no other census data on Scots for comparison in the meantime,
the 2011 data evidently do not tell us if the perception of Scots as a language
has increased or decreased, or whether more or fewer informants
acknowledge Scots as part of their own personal linguistic repertoire.
However, whilst the data do offer insights into the geographical distribution
of where respondents have reported skills in Scots, and how the perception of
Scots is stratified by other demographics such as age (Macafee 2017, also
consult Leslie 2020), perhaps more importantly, the 2011 census laid down
one of several modern-day institutional and symbolic foundations for Scots’
ideological legitimacy as a language in its own right. The Scots language
question is indicative of a successful attempt to intervene in an extant
metadiscourse about the Scots language, using state instruments such as the
census to legitimise ideological claims about the Scots language through a

31

Census 2011, Question 16 (“Which of these can you do? Tick all that apply. [English,
Scottish Gaelic, Scots] [Understand, Speak, Read, Write]”); see
https://www.scotlandscensus.gov.uk/media/hy3dprby/language_topic_report.pdf -accessed 27 June 2022
32
Scotland’s Census 2022, Question 14 (“Can you understand, speak, read, and write
Scottish Gaelic or Scots? Tick all that apply.”); see
https://www.scotlandscensus.gov.uk/documents/scotland-s-census-2022-question-set/ -accessed 27 June 2022

173



Linguists, academia, and the legitimation of the Scots language
survey category in a process of social scientific legitimation (Sebba 2019). The
political and social contexts surrounding Scots today are by no means unique
to Scotland—compare, as an example, English/Scots mutual intelligibility and
historical relationship between the two with debates around non-standard
regiolects such as Gallo and standard French in Brittany (see Keller 2019;
Patton 2020)—but given the historical trajectory of Scots language issues in
Scottish society, it is not just top-down political instruments such as the census
which have moved forward with conceptual legitimation of the Scots
language, as I will go on to illustrate.

4.2.2. Schools, universities, and wider academia

Political interest specifically in the Scots language likely goes back at least a
century, when Scots dialects were interpreted as a cultural reference point for
the Scottish nation in a post-industrial world (Costa 2012: 99), altogether
indexicalising linguistic authenticity in the literature, poetry, and music of
modern Scotland. Emerging out of the so-called Scottish Renaissance have
been various special historical interest groups such as the Scots Leid Associe
(Scots Language Society) and contemporary public bodies such as the Scots
Language Centre, although no one single organisation fronts Scots language
advocacy as a whole. Scots language activism is consequently represented by
different actors in contemporary society, actively engaging authors, poets,
playwrights, politicians, educators, and academic researchers (McClure 1980
& 2000; Wilson 2012; Giles 2019; Needler & Fairbairn 2021).
Scottish universities and other higher educational settings themselves
act as a repository of cultural autonomy and study of national literature,
folklore, and cultural history. Indeed, it was a perceived decline of Scots that
had been brought up by communities at Scottish universities and national
media that gave rise to an “increase in the use of Scots” as a counter-cultural
174



Linguists, academia, and the legitimation of the Scots language
reaction of “literary and cultural independence” well into the 20th century
(Unger 2010: 101-2). Modern-day interest in the Scots language is
contextualised by a change in attitudes towards non-standard varieties of
everyday vernacular speech, alongside emerging national sentiment in
Scottish civil society, various university departments have engaged with
Scottish studies from the 1950s onwards (Aitken 1994). As a result, we have
witnessed cross-university, long-term corpus work such as the completion of
the Scottish National Dictionary in the 1970s, the creation of literary journals
like Lallans: The Journal o Scots Airts an Letters, and a translation of the New
Testament (see Aitken 1994; Sebba 2019).
Alongside these developments, university societies such as the Scots Leid
Quorum at the University of Aberdeen were established, attempts were made
to teach Scots as an additional language, conferences on Scots were organised
(McClure 1980) and, indeed, some have submitted PhD theses in Scots (for
example, Allan 1998). Yet, aside from more recent policy declarations and the
2011 census, education and schooling have also become considerably
instrumental in Scots policy initiatives, especially where research on
bi/multilingualism and reported cognitive benefits are used to front the
promotion of Scots literacy and oral skills amongst younger generations (see
McPake & Arthur 2006). Whilst universal literacy in English through schooling
was indeed one of the contributing factors to the decline of Scots, some schools
have more recently been sites of various language initiatives such as studentled coursework projects in Scots (Needler & Fairbairn 2021) and the
development of the Scottish Qualification Authority’s Scots Language Award as
part of the national literacy curriculum (see Unger 2013: 17ff).
The status and use of Scots as an autonomous language, rather than a
non-standard variety or dialect of English, would suggest that both Scots and
English are on the same level as autonomous languages, directly challenging
175



Linguists, academia, and the legitimation of the Scots language
extant ideologies about linguistic identity and the status of this vernacular
versus standard English. Consequently, in the run-up to the results of the 2022
census, further examination of the activities of various social actors in Scots
language advocacy gives us an opportunity to witness the renegotiation of
Scots ideologies in everyday life.

4.3.

Language

activism,

observational

fieldwork

and

metapragmatic analysis
Language activism is a site of critical enquiry in linguistic anthropology and
sociolinguistics, surveying social debates and actions where language issues
represent campaigns for social justice (Putra 2018), the socio-political
potential of language-users’ agency (Heller & Duchêne 2016; Keller 2019),
and processes of cultural revitalisation and reclamation (Albury & Carter
2018). My research is concerned with examining and assessing how (a)
language and linguistic themes are engaged within the public space by varying
social actors, and more specifically the “activists” or “advocates” amongst
them. The research on Scots presented in the paper forms part of a broader
doctoral project which comprises three different case studies of minority
language activism in contemporary Europe; whilst other case studies (one on
Norwegian Nynorsk, another on Catalan) are not referred to in this paper,
there is overlap in methods and analytical approaches.
The study of language activism, advocacy, revitalisation, or reclamation
all encompass a broad sociolinguistic survey of various individuals, collectives,
movements, and socio-political motions where themes of identity, heritage,
minority/majority status, migration, and contestation of power come together
in a nexus of ideology construction. What makes an individual specifically an
“activist”, or how social action constitutes “activism” in the public space, are
both open questions that this study addresses by focusing on the role of
176



Linguists, academia, and the legitimation of the Scots language
universities and their academics in the metadiscourse of the Scots language.
Whilst some studies have focused their analysis of language activism on
activity specific to Indigenous communities subject to colonial legacies
(Makoni & Criss 2017), assertions of ethnic identity and self-determination in
the public space (Flores 2017; Dołowy-Rybińska 2018), or efforts to revitalise
a severely threatened or extinct language (Sallabank 2013; Urla 2012),
language activism may not necessarily need to be treated theoretically as a
phenomenon with essentially defined attributes. Rather, due to the meaningmaking nature of social action and language being used as cultural capital,
“activism” may broadly constitute various cases of social action, related to
language, which are performed by diverse actors within fluid communities of
practice (De Korne 2021, see also Avineri et al. 2019).
With the construction of ideological discourse as a theoretical starting
point, I focus primarily on associations between named language varieties
(such as Scots), language more generally, and wider social or cultural debates
by contextualising the behaviour of “culturally embedded speaker[s]” (Irvine
& Gal 2008: 78), including academics as a category of social actor. That is to
say that ideological stances are frequently represented and reinterpreted in
the public space by actors with varying roles and responsibilities as they
engage with a metadiscourse: evolving rhetorical narratives of language about
language (Kymlicka 2001, Edwards 2006). This allows for activism to be
interpreted as participative, accounting for speaker agency (see, for example,
Schwartz 2018), notions of agentive linguistic citizenship in multilingual
contexts (Stroud 2001) and allowing linguistic ethnographers like myself to
also account for different or unexpected manifestations of language activism
in social life (Combs & Penfield 2012).

177



Linguists, academia, and the legitimation of the Scots language
4.3.1. Data collection and analysis

I examine academia and universities as an ethnographic site of metadiscourse
in as far as they are host to “situated social actors” whose behaviour can be
interpreted through a metapragmatic analysis (Jaffe 2007: 57). As a snapshot
of a broader set of observations, I offer situated perspective on Scots
metadiscourse in an academic setting. As a metapragmatic analysis, I highlight
language ideologies as they are “performed” in the public space (Blommaert
2011: 127ff), framed by broader contextualising cultural behaviours which
indexicalise varying stances within Scots language metadiscourse. Other active
ethnographic fieldwork which contextualises my observations, including semistructured interviews which began in late 2019, took place prior to the
Coronavirus pandemic. My other fieldwork data collected prior to 2020
included ethnographic jottings at public Scots language events (including the
inaugural 2019 Scots Language Awards ceremony in Glasgow 33), followed by
notes taken at the University of Edinburgh’s Scots@ed symposium on 25
January 2020.
Alongside three other postgraduate students at the University of
Edinburgh, I co-organised a one-day Scots language symposium which was
host to speakers and panel guests from a range of universities and civil society
organisations—Scots@ed—on 25 January 2020.34 This was the second
iteration of this symposium at the university and drew on Scots and Scottish
English being specialisations of the department of Linguistics and English
Language. The event itself invited speakers from the Universities of Glasgow,
Aberdeen, and Edinburgh, comprising both academic staff and doctoral

33

Not to be confused with the Scots Language Award issued by the Scottish Qualifications
Authority
34
“Scots@ed”: https://www.ed.ac.uk/ppls/linguistics-and-english-language/news/scots-ed
-- accessed 15 June 2022

178



Linguists, academia, and the legitimation of the Scots language
researchers.35 In addition, individuals from government agencies and Scots
advocacy organisations were also featured on our programme representing
Education Scotland, the Scots Language Centre, and the recently constituted
group Oor Vyce. Not all potential Scots organisations were present, such as the
Scots Leid Associe.
I jotted notes throughout Scots@ed of examples of metalanguage during
the presentations specifically given by academic staff and scholars, and these
are mapped out in a chronological, descriptive analysis. I present the Scots@ed
event as a metadiscursive site, limiting my focus primarily on how Scots
metadiscourse is negotiated by academics in a public-facing setting.
Ethnographic data in the form of jottings and fieldnotes are analysed by
highlighting where and how they actively renegotiate and construct narratives
about language, not just by explicit language ideological statements, but by
various linguistic practices that “feed into” ideological discourse about
language (Verschueren 1998: 65).

4.3.2. Positionality and ethics

In line with the University of Edinburgh’s Linguistics and English Language
ethics guidelines, observational data are gathered from events open to the
public. I do not consider myself a speaker of Scots in as far as I grew up in the
south of England until the age of 18. As an ethnographic study and given my
own personal relationships with participants including my own active
involvement in Scottish political activism, my positionality is informed by both
my insider role as event co-organiser and friend to some of those attending
the event, as well as an outsider role as I grew up in England.

35

“Scots@ed Programme”: https://www.ed.ac.uk/sites/default/files/atoms/files/scotsed2020-programme.pdf - accessed 15 June 2022

179



Linguists, academia, and the legitimation of the Scots language
The implications of sharing common concerns and relationships with
those engaged in the promotion and defence of a disputed language variety
may be viewed as compromising for linguistic researchers (see Hudley 2013).
Linguists’ positionality can be polemicised where socio-political debates
feature in their research, and one may abuse their position by neither
addressing nor accounting for personal biases (Bowern 2015). However,
following practice in Lubet (2018) and Gal & Irvine (2019), it is inherently
implied that my gaze as participant-observer is drawn more to some sites and
events, and less to others. Ethnographic methods are nevertheless an
appropriate approach to situated research as they also are strengthened by
building rapport with contacts as well as scoping out access to participants or
connections to different organisations (see Bernard 2006; Copland & Creese
2015; De Fina 2020). Consequently, the aim of my fieldwork is to provide a
specific account of metadiscourse in one social setting, and not from the
perspective of a Scots speaker.

4.4.

Scots@ed as a site of metadiscourse

An early-morning conversation between myself and one member of the public
at the coffee-urn already highlights the significance of a Scots event in an
academic setting. The event has yet to start, but after informing her of my role
as co-organiser, she informs me about her own frustrations with the way Scots
has been treated in the public arena—“I blame MacDiarmid”36—referring to
the purported literary elitism that has been stoked by groups such as the Scots
Leid Associe. To begin proceedings, the plenary talk from Glasgow’s Joanna
Kopaczyk is introduced by my colleague Lisa Gotthard. Kopaczyk is introduced

36

Hugh MacDiarmid, pen name of Christopher Murray Grieve (1892-1978) – poet, political
activist, and proponent of Lallans.

180



Linguists, academia, and the legitimation of the Scots language
by her full title—Senior Lecturer in Scots and English—which Gotthard
remarks is “quite the title”, likely because it is the only role at a Scottish
university which specifies Scots alongside, separately from and before English.
I had met and spoken with Kopaczyk before, as we both gave short talks to the
University of Glasgow’s Linguistics Society at a pub during a nationwide
university strike; activism as the role of a linguist or academic was a pertinent
theme not just in conversation with her but also the students who were there
to listen. Joanna starts her talk in Scots—it is a “gae pleasure” and she’s “gae
chuffed” to be able to present on the topic, “takin tent o Scots”—and this all
evokes a certain vernacular style of language that differentiates itself from the
more standard English she uses in the rest of the presentation: “my regular
means of academic communication”. Her presentation of Scots and her
research on the language is focused on Scots being “a linguistic variety not
uniformly recognised” and the role of academics is called into question.
In discussing this, she raises the issue of expectations of Scots speakers
to use a form of language that is considered authentic; the main focus is always
authenticity when Scots is compared to English and seen by the public as its
“ugly sister”. She draws in parallels with her own Polish identity, background,
and infancy, where distinctions between “good” or “bad” language are a major
learning exercise when studying a new language, and so in the Scots context,
parents have a role to play in how they value the language they speak: “let’s
educate those parents as well”. Kopaczyk then raises a question: “Scotland has
a heritage of status-raising”, and maybe we as an academic community are in
a better situation than before to go back to the communities themselves and
give confidence and legitimacy to the way people speak in a way that values
Scots. One of the comments she receives from the audience suggests that
“public awareness is the realm of linguists”, to which Kopaczyk replies “why
do you need a linguist to do this and that? … that’s a problem!”. She then
181



Linguists, academia, and the legitimation of the Scots language
states that it is so ingrained that people do not treat Scots autonomously, much
to her own frustration: “it [Scots] has a medieval history, for God’s sake”. The
differentiation between groups of Scots speakers is presented as a result of
historical parallels, and a denial of Scots’ role as a language which has a
particular social function beyond the vernacular. She points to the example of
Catalonia and use of Catalan in the public environment in an attempt to raise
Catalan’s status. Scots, on the other hand, is assigned a low register socially,
and there is a peculiarity where minds of Scots speakers are in part “colonised”
by the situation and the obfuscation of what Scots is when compared with
English.
After a while we are joined by Dawn Leslie from the University of
Aberdeen who presents a summary of her PhD thesis. Her work is a perceptual
dialectological study of Doric, referring to the name used to describe northeastern Scots. The major initial block in a project like this is how Doric is
discursively differentiated from Scots, with additional arguments about where
Doric is actually located/where speakers are based. Leslie discusses different
media interpretations of Doric, as “it might seem simple; it’s just a dialect in
north-east Scotland”, but it is more than just a label for a linguistic group of
Scots. The prevalence of Doric exceptionalism is, according to Leslie, a “fairly
recent development”, but the use of Doric as a non-geographic term—beyond
a vague “up a bit and to the right”—create further issues. Doric cannot be
essentially defined, and it is not a purely linguistic issue; concerns about
mutual intelligibility do not seem to convince those who insist that their
language is Doric rather than Scots, and this also muddies the extent to which
we can judge census data about Scots, for example.
We also hear from E Jamieson, a recent PhD graduate from the
University of Edinburgh, at the time based at Glasgow. They have worked as
part of a team to help develop the online interactive Scots Syntax Atlas, an
182



Linguists, academia, and the legitimation of the Scots language
online resource not just for linguistic research purposes, but also for general
education and personal curiosity.37 Immediately from the start, Jamieson uses
the interactive features of the online portal to highlight stratified dialectal
variation and how it might intersect with people’s own identities and
relationships with both Scots and English. Jamieson appears enthusiastic
about the way that the materials could be looked at from a non-insider
perspective, with wider appeal to anyone who is interested in Scots: it is a
“major new resource”, they exclaim at one point. The way that data were
collected not just by the team but by students who returned to their “home”
community strikes me as an interesting way of doing Scots language
advocacy—even passively—as active linguistic research is implemented for the
sake of building a resource which can legitimise the study of Scots as a group
of dialects and therefore a language variety itself. The resource and the data
are not framed as varieties of English, but instead as the dialects spoken
throughout Scotland, within a Scottish setting. The clearest issue, however, is
that all the data and the analysis is still presented in academic English and talk
about using the atlas for language planning or standardisation of the language
is absent. Comments from Jennifer Smith (University of Glasgow), who is
sitting in the audience, raise the point that traditionally we are used to a
situation where “we talk ‘around about’ Scots”, whereas this new resource
gives academics and non-academics alike access to something tangible.
Later on, Edinburgh lecturer Warren Maguire presents research from his
own background in Ulster Scots, a related language variety spoken in Northern
Ireland. During his talk, he states that much of the contemporary talk about
Scots is no longer an academic discussion behind closed doors, and like Leslie,
Maguire points to the emergence of a plethora of arguments and opinionated

37

Scots Syntax Atlas - https://scotssyntaxatlas.ac.uk/ - accessed 15 June 2022

183



Linguists, academia, and the legitimation of the Scots language
exchanges online; “when you interact with Scots speakers online…” he
problematises the lack of accessible information that people can use and relate
to when talking meaningfully about Scots. He asks people in the room to
respond to how they would pronounce “2”; some say twa, others twae, others
indeed just say standard English “two”. Maguire tries to prove a point that
“even non-linguists can access that sort of information”, and so the existence
of variability and difference between different varieties of Scots can quickly
become polemicised when it comes to accounting for what counts as Scots,
and what does not.
To conclude the day, a panel comprising Joanna Kopaczyk, PhD student
Claire Needler, teacher Jill Haywood, and writer Sam Best on standardisation
is chaired by my colleague Stephen McNulty. Kopaczyk begins with the
springboard of her own talk, announcing “let’s demythologise the standard”;
the creation of standards for Scots has been a topic of Scots discourse for
decades, and her own attitude towards it seems to be one of slight exhaustion
with the constant debate due to how we typically conceptualise what a
standard Scots would/should look like. A standard would essentially lead to
the “formalising of the discourse of Scots”. Jennifer Smith contributes again
from the audience, stating that “the standard is always an abstraction”,
whereas actual Scots is the language spoken on the ground rather than in an
idealised form. What previous attempts to standardise Scots have done is use
Latinate vocabulary repurposed from before the Act of Union and “archaic
vocab” which is “not relatable” for the Scots speaker today; there has been too
much “top-down” policing of what Scots is without looking to examine
language on the ground. Kopaczyk highlights parallels with the 17th century
and how registers were constructed in writing. Best’s contribution addresses
the “open-endedness of non-standard Scots”, which is “a strength”. From her
perspective as a teacher, she says that a fluid way to Scots spelling and
184



Linguists, academia, and the legitimation of the Scots language
standardisation would be an easier state of affairs as “every teacher would like
to a take a red pen and tick it [the written work of the pupil]”, rather than
adhere to one representation of speech or stylistic expectations.
Other contributions from the audience suggest that “a standard would
kill it [Scots]”, and that a standard does not necessarily mean a spoken
standard; rather, we are talking more specifically about the written form.
There appears to be a tacit understanding in the room that any standard will
inherently restrict the way Scots is written, yet this need not also be the case
for how Scots is spoken. McNulty then draws the discussion to Claire Needler,
whose fieldwork has taken place in a school where students have engaged
with Scots language projects, asking whether written Scots is a form of
“rebellion” against English; this brings up wider themes about Scottish cultural
and political differentiation from the rest of the UK, such as opposition to
Brexit. Kopaczyk notes that European frameworks around linguistic
standardisation and language rights are being “side-tracked and denied”; we
do not need to conceptualise linguistic issues like these as matters of rejecting
one language to replace it with another. Towards the end, broader topics such
as Scots language media akin to Gaelic’s own are mentioned, as well as status
planning to raise Scots’ legitimacy in social use.

4.5.

Discussion: Scots@ed in context—academia and legitimation

of Scots
Academic interest in Scots and research into the languages of Scotland provide
a rendezvous point for social actors in which Scots can be conceptually
identified and ideologically positioned vis-à-vis standard English. These
narratives furthermore engage with discourses of language minoritisation; as
a matter of strategy for public engagement, Scots language ideologies may be
legitimised if they are seen to correspond with a minority language community
185



Linguists, academia, and the legitimation of the Scots language
and

counter-cultural

movement

(compare

Catalan

discourses

of

minoritisation; Cortès-Colomé, Barrieras & Comellas 2016). Such naming and
self-awareness do not come about through objective study but require
individuals and the institutions around them to acknowledge a language
community by buying into a discourse about a language both existing and
being minoritised; if not one that is subject to conceptual colonisation, to
paraphrase Kopaczyk. Likewise, to be a Scots speaker may be to engage in a
self-labelling activity in a context of heightened awareness of a Scots language,
and awareness is also built up by academic talk about Scots—such social
action may be perceived by wider society as inherently ideological—as
language activism alongside broad communities of practice comprising
grassroots advocates and political campaigners.
From a broader ethnographic perspective, Scots in the 21st century is
the site of the rhetorical and narrative construction of sociolinguistic debates
and the desire by various social actors—including linguists and other
academics—to address paralinguistic questions through various policies:
status planning, standardisation, educational use, and media landscape, to
name a few instances. In order to legitimise claims to recognition and status
and further the ideological position of Scots in civil society, Scottish academia
is one of many sites and platforms of legitimation and public-facing
engagement in a broad, dynamic landscape of Scots language advocacy. This
is a situation which subsequently implicates various linguists as contributors
in much of the Scots metadiscourse that further social actors employ in Scots
language activism, as the Scots@ed event demonstrates. Even by hosting and
moderating an event which engages in talk about Scots as an autonomous
language variety in a legitimising academic setting and inviting speakers from
outside academia who also advocate for Scots in legislation and the national

186



Linguists, academia, and the legitimation of the Scots language
education system, we as organisers too are implicated in an active site of the
negotiation of Scots language ideology amongst other social actors.
As brought up in conversation, some Scots language advocates had
before focused on the Scots language of the past and romanticised a language
variety that is neither reflected stylistically or lexically in modern-day
vernacular speech varieties, sometimes with the goal of removing influence
from English or supposedly contaminated urban speech (see Macafee 1994 for
further discussion). The engagement of today’s linguists, conversely—whilst
giving a platform to the discussion of Scots language topics through public
institutions—engages a modern, diachronic framing of Scots, engaging in talk
about Scots as a contemporary language variety with structural variation, that
is still a language in active use today and can be tabulated and presented
diachronically through online resources such as the Scots Syntax Atlas for
public use. As a matter of how universities engage with the public, the publicfacing discourse by linguists becomes one that therefore legitimises the stance
that Scots can be interpreted as an autonomous variety—not essentially on the
grounds of Scots’ historical use as a national language prior to Union, nor
specifically on the basis of Scotland’s contemporary nationalism—but by
identifying and engaging with the features of vernacular speech in Scotland,
“constructing” a Scots language around it through an evolving rhetoric (Unger
2013).
By no means is this context of language ideological discourse unique to
Scotland, and I would stress that one will find parallels in various contexts
across Europe and the processes of post-19th century nation-building. One
close parallel would be the development of standards for the Norwegian
language after Norway’s becoming semi-autonomous in 1814 and the
establishment of its own government and national institutions, which required
not just the input of the day’s philologists and dialectologists “normalising”
187



Linguists, academia, and the legitimation of the Scots language
politicised claims of Norwegian as a language deserving of its own
orthography and daily use (Ljosland 2021: 156), but still continues to involve
national research institutions working alongside public bodies such as the
Language Council of Norway and the management of national dictionaries or
official spelling rules, for example. Therefore, the case of Scots is an additional
example of where societal talk about language is both a dynamic and situated
act—naturally subjective—and therefore never neutrally positioned. In
consideration of how social scientific work directly interacts with various
publics, social discourse, and cultural contexts, it is not the case that linguists
or other academics are able to be distanced from the rest of society, or that
their interventions in the public space cannot be construed as part of existing
or emerging ideological narratives about language.
Another side to this discussion is how we try to conceive of language
activists as a set group within the complex dynamics of who exactly pioneers
language variation, change and shift at any given time. As one example, in
Blackwood’s work on language activists in Corsica (2008) we are confronted
with how we try to analyse language activism in the context of a minoritised
language variety when there is a significant blur between those who are
sympathetic state actors on the one hand, and grassroots language activists on
the other, i.e., politicians who are also active members of civil society language
organisations. These divisions often appear difficult to maintain objectively,
especially as talk about language is not solely the reserve of the linguist or any
other group; it is essentially something all users of language are invested in.
We may posit that non-academic, “folk” discourse about language (see
Coupland & Jaworski 1998: 23-4) is in a cyclical and symbiotic relationship
with a supposed “expert” metalanguage of linguists and wider academic
society, although how the category of expert in society is actually regimented

188



Linguists, academia, and the legitimation of the Scots language
and enforced is rarely defined, and often is the result of subjective
interpretations (Cameron 1998: 317ff).
The use of any cultural capital, such as (a specific) language is
ultimately bound to “[accrue] sociopolitical meaning” (Bucholtz & Hall 2004:
379). Circulation of talk about Scots requires an unavoidable use of familiar
public rhetoric and metalanguage, feeding into wider societal discourses not
just about Scots but also the nature of language beyond the level of its
structure, or how we even conceptualise a language in the public space (see
Auer 2011). Both the explicit naming of Scots as a language variety and
engaging in research on it drive processes of conceptual deliberation and
ideological legitimisation. From this position, we must be sensitive to how
language use and discourse about language may constitute language activism
in the public eye, where language use is “interwoven” with speaker
biographies (Bridges 2019: 45), cultural history and categories of identity over
time.
***
As a concluding summary: this paper is reflective springboard towards further
discussion of academic activity and its relationship with the development of
language ideological discourse. I have presented a brief, yet contextualised
and situated perspective on the position of academic research in relation to
wider contemporary Scots advocacy as part of tracking a historical trajectory
of language activism from the 20th century onwards. I have described how the
both the disputed ideological and conceptual status of the Scots language
forms part of academic discourse in Scottish higher educational settings,
necessarily positioning academics who deal with Scots as contributors to and
enablers of current narratives in nationwide Scots language advocacy. In doing
so, I continue the conversation opened by Unger (2013) and others about how
the Scots language is conceptually constructed by various social actors, and I
189



Linguists, academia, and the legitimation of the Scots language
have integrated discussion about the cultural capital of language in social
discourse and the blurring of conceptual boundaries between linguists,
language activists or other categories of membership in the public space due
to the participative reality of social life. As such, advocacy of Scots language
issues continues to relate to a wider body of social action that moves in and
out of social scientific research at Scottish universities where talk about Scots
co-constructs Scots language ideology and contributes to metapragmatic
discourses which, in the cases presented, support the stance of an autonomous
and culturally distinct Scots language.

190



Discussion and conclusions

5. Discussion and conclusions
This doctoral thesis comprises studies which have examined case-studies of
language activism; their outcomes collectively form a broader theoretical
discussion around definitions and approaches to the description of terms such
as “language activist” and “language activism”. As a collection of papers which
study and reflect on contemporary discourses of minority and minoritised
languages in Catalonia, Norway, and Scotland respectively, the conclusions of
this thesis provide the basis for further discussion about how language
activism may be both deconstructed as a theoretical term of reference, and
evaluated through a lens which allows for greater discussion of what
researchers mean by “activist” and what constitutes “activism” in these spaces.
As stated in the introduction, there has been considerable shift away
from several of my original research objectives—namely around establishing
a reformed theoretical framework to research language activism—and
consequently the reader will note that the general outcomes of this doctoral
research do not make any explicit attempt to address this thesis’ original 201819 research questions. Given the significant interruption experienced by
higher education in 2020, each of the article manuscripts were written
separately and in turn, and therefore reflect instead stand-alone attempts to
make effective use of data collected prior to March of that year, generating
insights on and around the topic of language activism as a matter of deeper
theoretical discussion.
Although the scope of this thesis does not make any active attempt to
compare and contrast the findings each of the three case-studies as a language
policy and planning exercise, what this thesis does do is present examples of
ethnographic research which evaluate discourses of activism, the dynamic
sites in which they take place, and the fluid relations that exist between
different types of social action, language-use and ideological orientations to
201



Discussion and conclusions
language, culture, and society at large. On these grounds, the discussion
presented in this conclusion draws together a (meta-)theoretical commentary
and springboard for future advances in sociolinguistic and linguistic
anthropological research. Within both of these disciplines, there is increased
interest and active research endeavours which attempt to study language “in
real life contexts” and more specifically to evaluate sociolinguistic contexts in
a manner that views language not solely as a cultural object, commodity or
identity, but more so “as a form of social action laden with cultural values”
(Ahearn 2017: 9-12).

5.1.

Towards a different perspective

As a preliminary summary, the general conclusion of this thesis is that
academics and non-academics alike are already known to use the terms
“language activism” or “language activist” in multiple ways, and if we desire
to employ these terms meaningfully within research on language in society
and within linguistic frameworks of language variation, shift, and change, I
would stress that we explore language activism in a manner that is not tied
down to finite definitions or restricted, categorical set of behaviours. Rather,
by considering the indexical and metapragmatic nature of language-use and
wider social action generally, language activism may well encompass
something much broader. If anything, this thesis may altogether present a case
warning against the uncritical use of restrictive definitions of language
activism, as all terms we use to conceptualise language in social life are
inherently “fuzzy” (Janicki 1990: 55). Consequently, and as I will go on to
further explain, the perspective I have taken on over the course of my doctoral
research

echoes

what

we

may

otherwise

call

a

conceptualisation of sociolinguistic phenomena (Janicki ibid.).
202

non-essentialist



Discussion and conclusions
Over the course of this thesis, I have attempted to engage with a
perspective that observes language activism and language activists as
embedded in wider social action and individual agency. Specifically, through
an ethnographic and discourse-oriented approach, my gaze has been directed
towards the broader peripheries of extant cases of language activism or
advocacy. As a result of significant interruptions in my research plan and,
indeed, as a formative part of my journey as an ethnographer, my own
personal orientation towards examining language activism has evolved over
the course of drafting these three manuscripts. The overall significance of this
thesis to the field is that its component case-studies contribute to an informed
theoretical critique of “language activism” and “language activist” as
terminological devices, and propose an alternative complimentary perspective
that draws on analyses on discourses of language activism, its relationship to
metalanguage and ideological meaning-making, and reflect what may be
summarised as a “fluid” framing of language activism within sociolinguistic
research (De Korne 2021: 7).
As stated in the introduction, the analytical focus in each of my casestudies has been on the subject, or the language-user, in dynamic contexts.
Subjects engage in various forms of social action, including the use of language
and other culturally meaningful activities; how we use language, what our
statements about language (metalanguage) do, and how our wider social
behaviour reflects language ideological stances. By engaging in a so-called
agentive “sociocultural” approach, we observe a metadiscursive life to activism
as a form of social action, where subjects participate and co-construct
language ideology as a matter of cultural practice (Hornberger & Johnson
2011: 284; see also Coupland & Jaworski 1998; Dołowy-Rybińska 2020).
Within social scientific research, we may nevertheless strive to typologise and
structurally engage with language activism in order to sufficiently theorise it
203



Discussion and conclusions
as a discreet concept. For some practitioners, this may be of particular use
when establishing “structural-functional” frameworks in language policy and
planning (Eckert 2018: 16). However, the studies in this thesis attempt to
position language activism more specifically as a concept pointing to a myriad
of examples of behaviour and cultural action which constitute a
metapragmatic intervention in extant ideologies and prevailing attitudes
towards language, identity, sociopolitical structures, and cultural meaning.

5.2.

Reflection: some observations

As stated at the beginning of this thesis, my revised research trajectory has
necessitated considerable rethinking about what exactly my informed
observations of language activism in each of the case-studies could achieve
with a much more limited set of qualitative data than had been anticipated.
The three articles that make up the body of this thesis exhibit a number of
ethnographic research trajectories and findings, and the research questions
examined in each of these article manuscripts vary significantly and are
products which attempt to organise frustrated and interrupted sets of
qualitative data. However, these studies ultimately constitute examinations of
activist discourses in sociopolitical settings with some politically contextual
similarities between them. As was one of the more explicit grounds for the
original 2018 research plan, each of the primary minority/minoritised
languages discussed in these studies (Catalan, Nynorsk/Norwegian dialects,
and Scots) exist alongside language varieties that are widely understood to be
acrolectal, to a certain degree mutually intelligible, socioeconomically
dominant, and also exhibit dynamic, fluctuating cultural and political currency
in contemporary social life in each respective geographical context. Again,
whilst the general focus of my conclusion is now directed towards a theoretical
204



Discussion and conclusions
discussion of language activism, I can briefly discuss some recurrent themes
that I have observed over the course of my fieldwork.
In amongst the internal language debates in Catalonia and Norway, it
is notable that the role of English as a global language plays a contributing
role to much of the anxiety I observed amongst those I met and interviewed
prior to March 2020; with both geographical contexts being the site of
considerable economic activity in Europe, it is perhaps unsurprising that the
use of English in academia and business contexts both pose perceived
challenges to the role of Catalan and Nynorsk/Norwegian dialects.
Specifically, the extent to which legislative policy concerning Catalan and
Norwegian could be specifically enforced appeared to be of concern when
dealing with advances in artificial intelligence and contemporary software.
One explicit example I remember from my 2019 fieldtrip to Norway was that
during a discussion of Noregs Mållag members of how to influence
multinational corporations to incorporate Nynorsk into their user interface
platforms, one participant exclaimed their frustration: “men Google har jo
ikkje noko telefonnummer!” [but Google doesn’t even have a telephone
number!], referencing to members’ inability to contact these organisations as
easily as they might with domestic Norwegian businesses. Likewise,
organisations such as Plataforma per la llengua were and still remain actively
lobbying to make social media platforms and streaming services provide their
services in Catalan, where they often default to Castilian or English instead.
Whereas the independence of the Norwegian state is no longer a
disputed issue (besides dormant debate about Norwegian accession to the
EU), there is also the topic of how the language activist movements of Scotland
and Catalonia reflect their independence movements. There is perhaps a
broader reality to reflect here, which is that the language activist discourses in
each of my case-studies more or less reflect how “[s]truggles over language
205



Discussion and conclusions
are not centrally about language at all [but] struggles over power involving
social groups whose categorization is somehow part of the fundamental
principles of social organization of the people in question” (Heller 2014: 285).
Language, or more specifically a language, is constituted by a range of
linguistic practices used by an innumerable number of individuals who
themselves exist in dynamic and overlapping communities. To speak a
language, to write in a language, to engage in discourses that espouse one
view or another about language, to generally use whatever is within our
communicative repertoire to express a position or view – altogether these
reflect how we endeavour to engage with language as a sort of economic
resource (cf. Heller & Duchêne 2016).
It is not the case on the ground that users of the language varieties I
describe in this thesis are necessarily unable to use them or see them in use,
which would be the case in Catalonia (cf. Hawkey 2015), but rather there are
wider debates about the extent to which ideological visions of the relationship
between territory, its inhabitants and its languages are altogether presented
and engaged with. Language in itself is an indexical system, and in amongst
Catalonia’s relative multilingualism, circulating ideologies with regard to
identity and political affiliations are embedded into linguistic practices that
are hotly contested and also reflect a longstanding question of national selfdetermination and the extent to which a Catalan nation goes hand in hand
with Catalan language speakership. This, in part, allows us to contextualise
the contemporary emergence of groups such as No em canviïs la llengua in an
increasingly international and transnational age alongside the more
prototypical and traditional civil society organisations that served to promote
various Catalan language policy objectives and popular awareness in the
advent of Spain’s transition away from Francoism and Castilian supremacy.

206



Discussion and conclusions
With regard to the Scots case, I also observe how developments on the
ground are a further indication of how interest in and use of Scots is both a
practical and symbolic set of linguistic practices, even amongst those who
either do not use Scots or consider the language to be a part of their linguistic
repertoire. There is a simultaneous awareness of the language’s former
historical prestige—that is, as a named language variety considered separate
from the Old English/Anglic varieties used elsewhere—and public
acknowledgement of the minoritised status it has; the intervention of
academics and linguists in the active discursive construction of the Scots
language (vis-à-vis Scottish Standard English) becoming agents of a significant
stance against the grain of dominant language attitudes in Scotland, chimes
also with Scots’ ongoing symbolism as that of one representing a national
counter-culture: one that is not standardised, not controlled, if not
unshackled, altogether representative of a form of cultural rebellion from
prestige norms whilst also emancipatory in its ability to represent the
vernacular of a significant proportion of the Scottish population (cf. Giles
2019). Its “value” as a cultural object, beyond the unwritten language variety
spoken on the street, is legitimated further on a platform with considerable
pull in Scottish society, given Scotland’s academic heritage and the ongoing
development of Scottish civil society through its own self-government and reemerging national sense of self (Costa 2016: 54). It is not even activism or
advocacy to necessarily meet a specific end—to engage in activist-like
discourses and for linguistic practices to also reflect different stances on the
matter, the outcome may just as well be to perpetuate the ideological fight,
or, alternatively put in the Scottish context, the “charter myth” that justifies
and rationalises the discussion of Scots in public discourse (Costa ibid.: 63).
With all of this said, what was originally going to be a proposed
framework for understanding language activism in sociolinguistic research,
207



Discussion and conclusions
based on a comparative analysis of three case-studies with their comparable
linguistic and sociocultural contexts, has now become a springboard for a
broader reflection on what we mean by language activism in the first place.
The revised main title of this thesis—Intervention, Participation, Perception—
is drawn from three focal points that have emerged from theoretical
observations in my papers: conceptualising the act of intervening in extant
metadiscourse, how social actors participate in metadiscourses through their
use of metalanguage, and the ways in which social action can be perceived as
activism.

5.3.

Discussion: finding activism—finding activists

The three studies in this thesis comprise discourse-oriented evaluations of
language activism on the ground from the perspective of an informed insideroutsider. Fundamentally, the theoretical crux of this research critically
assesses notions of language activism as a normatively defined concept,
effectively “questioning what is taken for granted” in terms of how extant
terms are used in sociolinguistic research and across the wider field of
language studies (Barakos & Unger 2016: 3). It is important to stress in any
case that whilst a proposal to reanalyse and theoretically reframe language
activism is a possible venture, the work in this thesis as a set of ethnographies
ultimately remains hypothesis-generating and open-ended, rather than
hypothesis-testing and finite. In effect, one is sketching out biographies and
experiences in addition to providing informed descriptions of observed life,
rather than attempting to answer questions definitively and towards a
theoretical end (Agar 1980).
There has been considerable evolution away from sociolinguistic models
which typologise language ideologies within dominant structures of power
towards ones which interpret power and discourse as “a far more layered and
208



Discussion and conclusions
fragmented” phenomenon, necessitating a zoomed-in analysis of social life
and the life of the individual linguistic subject (Blommaert 2018: 3).
Consequently, whilst textual or codified language policies, government action
and the work of established civil society groups all remain part of the
sociocultural contexts that inform instances of discourse about language and
documented instances of language activism, they are not the only factors
which influence and contextualise our situated language practices and other
forms of social action. The studies therefore highlight peripheral instances of
language activism, such as the role of non-native speakers, relationships and
common cause with other social campaigns, and the manner in which other
social actors can be incorporated into a wider conceptualisation of the
phenomenon. Each context is already the site of documented examples of
language activism or minority language discourse, and so I entered the field
as an informed observer wishing to draw focus on these same dominant
themes and individuals engaged in discourses of activism. Nevertheless, the
thesis presents the result of how I chanced upon the activities of other
communities and individuals in spite of the original research questions being
far more focused on the evaluation of already established major civil society
organisations such as Plataforma per la llengua or Noregs Mållag. The
disruption of 2020, whilst unfortunate, offered a unique opportunity to step
back from the data and re-evaluate the intentions and theoretical significance
of my work.
By engaging in an observation and synchronic research methodology,
the ethnographer is often minded not to “commit […] to a naïve empiricism”,
or in other words, that the research conducted to understand the field should
not be interpreted as summative or finite interpretation of a broader set of
social phenomena (Asad 1994: 65-6). Ethnography offers a unique
opportunity to absorb and reflect on extant perspectives and approaches to the
209



Discussion and conclusions
analysis of language in social life. What one discovers and describes along the
way is not necessarily an attempt to shoot down dominant ideas and
frameworks in any belligerent way, but to critique and build upon them. What
comes out of ethnographic fieldwork are therefore further informed proposals
and approaches, themselves open to the judgement of the wider academy and
further research endeavours. To theorise through ethnography is not to create
a rigid impression of what happens on the ground, but to “organise”
observational data in a constructive, re-evaluative process (ibid.: 66). On
broader reflection, the work in this thesis is more grounded in the
methodological and philosophical angle of linguistic anthropology than
defined models of language policy and planning; the work comprises an
overall reassessment not just language activism in Catalonia, Norway and
Scotland as described, but the concepts and perspectives used by me and other
practitioners in order to describe them.
When attempting to ‘find’ the activism and to ‘find’ the activists within
my ethnographic fieldwork, I actually often found myself attempting to enter
this “different social world” where one ‘does’ language activism and sees
activism being ‘done’ by others, and as such my ethnographic labour has been
an endeavour in “[unravelling] internal rationality” (Argenter 2011: 45). To
implement ethnographic research methods in this manner is to actively
construct frameworks and conceptualisations of social phenomena that are
therefore subject to change and non-finite, establishing modes of analysis
along the way. As established, terms in language policy and planning and
wider sociolinguistic research can be continually challenged, revised, and
refined through the incorporation of newer descriptions of extant phenomena
that ultimately “shed light” on what we thought we knew something about,
but perhaps not completely (Camps 2018: 102). In my own case, I did indeed
set out to develop a framework to research language activism—in essence,
210



Discussion and conclusions
find a more appropriate definition—based on a comparative analysis language
activism in western Europe, wanting to draw in insights from three relatively
comparable case-studies where Catalan, Nynorsk, and Scots each are
challenged politically and conceptually by larger, acrolectal and mutually
intelligible language varieties that also vie for sociocultural influence in an
increasingly globalised and connected world. However, each of my casestudies has raised further questions about how we conceptualise activism or
the activists themselves, and I have additionally described the contribution of
unforeseen or unexpected activists.
In the context of increased academic attention to social justice in
sociolinguistic research, it is still understandable that one might try to discern
activism more specifically as intended or explicit action, “[using and
supporting] strong actions to endorse or oppose an issue” and therefore a
conscious attempt to take a side in an ongoing cultural struggle (Avineri et al.
2019: 145). However, this does pose further questions about how we
holistically appraise social action that is perceived as activism by wider society
in as far as behaviour may represent an endorsement or oppositional stance
within context. Talk about language is a dynamic act and never neutrally
positioned; the reality on the ground is that there is a circulation of ideology
about language between linguists, other social actors, and all members of
society.

5.4.

Perspective: language activism and metadiscourse

Across all three studies, I stress that both “language activism” and “language
activists” can be deconstructed and critiqued using a metapragmatic lens
which highlights that participation in metadiscourse is not limited to any one
category of social actor, and that social action in context can represent
language activism or at least be perceived as such by virtue how using
211



Discussion and conclusions
language inherently makes meaning. Thus, the intention of this thesis has been
to propose that language activism may be better evaluated as metapragmatic
intervention, on the condition that we collectively accept that language
activism as a theoretical term is not definable in finite terms, that it is used to
describe a wide range of social activities, and that participation in
metadiscourse is part and parcel of language-use. A critical perspective, for
example, on social class within sociolinguistic fieldwork might necessitate us
to focus in on how notions of class are never constant nor static; how class is
perceived and practiced is context-dependent and very much is an indication
of broader developments in a social movement, awareness of identity, and
access to cultural or material resources in an ever-changing global community
(Coupland 2016). Likewise, a critical perspective on language activism may
wish to embrace multiple manifestations of the phenomenon and how it is
perceived not just in academic research but also by the wider public. The
unavoidable use of familiar rhetoric and metalanguage—however evaluatively
and analytically precise—feeds into how language about language has
meaning in the public sphere.
Indeed, linguists too have a potential role in the engineering of language
ideology, and the naming and legitimation of Scots in academic practice in
particular is an example of this deliberative social process. Whereas the
Nynorsk study is a focused on the activities on an already well documented
organisation and the extension of its activities and metalinguistic rhetorical
strategy to other Norwegian language communities, the examples of language
activism described in the Catalan and Scots contexts feature perhaps novel or
unusual examples of activism when compared to other documented casestudies in sociolinguistic research. With Scots@ed I have presented academic
research communities as potential contributors to the discursive construction
of the Scots language and position this contribution as (indirect) activism in
212



Discussion and conclusions
as far as academic involvement in Scots discourse represents a form of
ideological legitimation, and with No em canviïs la llengua I have witnessed
first-hand language advocacy fronted by learners and second-language
speakers of Catalan, a case which both complements and counters the more
traditional organisations or groups which have been featured before in the
literature describing language debates.

5.5.

Deconstructing the concept

In each of the papers, I was able to frame my observations in terminology that
is ultimately focused on the idea that all language-users have agency—all
“speakers are agents of change” (Hickey 2012: 404)—and that all languageuse in effect becomes meaningful, and therefore, ideological in context. This
chimes with recent perspectives in social anthropology too: activism is
ultimately a “core political concept” (Alexandrakis 2016: 1 [emphasis my
own]) for many academic practitioners and social commentators alike, but the
perpetual and obvious existence of other, alternative forms of social action and
other alternative movements of resistance or advocacy illustrate that we can
reorient our view of activism away from what is just explicitly political,
outwith conceptual limitations of the apparatus of the state or other governing
institutions, and focus far more on what has been interpreted previously as
fringe or subsidiary activity. The study of sociolinguistic consciousness,
speaker agency (in reference to Penny Eckert’s work) even at the level of the
individual, provides fertile ground for further analysis of how change, shift
and variation is motivated at multiple levels of any given social structure:
“[S]ociolinguistic changes can grow from speakers’ consciousness
and strategic performative use of specific linguistic forms such as
vowel

pronunciation

to

assert

213

membership

in

particular



Discussion and conclusions
communities. […] Such a model goes against the grain of the
traditional Labovian sociolinguistic claim that major linguistic
change from below the level of consciousness and is outside the
control of the speaker’s intentions and desires.” (Woolard 2008:
438)
Within this mode of thinking, the focus of sociolinguistic analysis can
be further extended to the social meaning-making constituted by linguistic
practices, and the way these are reinforced and reified between individuals
and throughout their lives; this is not necessarily a refutation of original
principles set out by earlier variationists such as William Labov, but rather a
further attempt of nuance when trying to tie together a fuller theorisation of
linguistic variation and linguistic practices (Coupland 2016). At this juncture,
the notion of “community of practice” may prove useful as an alternative
conceptualisation of how language activists themselves belong to diverse
groups and collectives “whose social practices and ideologies favor or disfavor
divergent innovation” (Woolhiser 2007: 396). That is to say that for language
activists to constitute one or several communities of practice, subjects exist in
spaces in which they are able alter and renegotiate their behaviours (this being
‘practice’) in locally situated groups related to in-group notions of identity,
cultural relationships, and common political cause (see Woschitz 2019a).
These communities are neither static nor permanent entities in and of
themselves—rather, by situating activism as social action which takes place in
“alternative spaces” from the ideological mainstream (paraphrasing Woschitz
2019b: 57), we are able to draw greater focus on activism more broadly as a
contextualised performance, linked to not just to social relationships and
ideologies, but also broader notions of identity, social justice, and individual
agency (Fras 2017). Accordingly, we need not discount the wide body of
214



Discussion and conclusions
research and work that has given us accounts of language activism over time,
but we can also incorporate wider social action around us into what we mean
by this term and leave behind vague notions of activists being “significant
participants in language management” (Spolsky 2009: 204). It was perhaps
fortunate that as I began to write this thesis Haley De Korne’s seminal
monograph Language Activism: Imaginaries and Strategies of Minority
Language Equality was also published; she rightly highlights that activists are
“fluid” communities of practice, without trying to boil the concept down to
any stubborn definition (2021: 7).
The articles in this thesis overall reflect a view that other linguists and
academics are likely to also see in their own work, after the so-called
ethnographic turn, in a sociolinguistics informed more and more through
“bottom-up” and speaker-focused, sociocultural research within various
communities and sites of cultural practice (Hornberger & Johnson 2011: 273).
Likewise, linguists can work with language activism more as an “object and
site” of discourse which uncovers a multitude of voices, ideologies, and
agendas at multiple levels (Lewis 2020: 20-1). Specifically, where
essentialised interpretations of language activism can be broken down through
ethnographic introspection, the clearer it may appear that language activism
is not the exercise of a limited set of activities or the domain of a specific group
of individuals, but rather how situated behaviours and statements about
language are embedded in the wider context of language ideological change,
in as far as it is conceptualised to be one of various extant cultural practices.
Consequently, this thesis brings together a study of activists within a wider
and critical understanding of language activism as a running concept in
sociolinguistic work.

215



Discussion and conclusions
5.6.

Inherent fuzziness: non-essentialism and further research

This thesis has presented papers whose themes echo a broader discussion
regarding how we can theoretically appraise sociolinguistic terminology.
When talking about language activism and language activists, we may also
face follow-up questions: how do we differentiate language activism from
other forms of social action, who exactly are the language activists, what do
they want, is their activity limited solely to discourse concerning language,
and in which sites do we find them? Sociolinguistics has long been beset by
“what-is” questions in its pursuit of a “better understanding of what happens
linguistically around us but also [the alleviation of] language-related
hardships and those going beyond language” (Janicki 1990: xi). But in a field
of

study

that

is

highly

focused

on

the

conceptualisation

and

compartmentalisation of human behaviour through observation by other
humans—a little different the study of a physical object, an acid, a biological
species, a rock formation—it bears repeating that to ask what something is
does not necessarily lead us to precise definitions. This is what Janicki refers
to as “fuzziness” in modern sociolinguistics:
“Such labels will always be fuzzy, and they will obviously invoke
indiscreet boundaries. This leads to the conclusion that an
individual linguist is free to conceptualize language the way he [sic.]
wants to as long as his [sic.] is sensible in the context of the
problem(s) that he is trying to solve. For instance, when one is
confronted with the problem of how language influences the results
of court trials, it would seem ridiculous to conceptualize language
as an abstract set of grammatical rules, and to at the same time
disregard linguistic behavior. In this particular case, conceptualizing
language activism as behavior (whatever the remaining aspects of
216



Discussion and conclusions
the concept might possibly be) would appear to be a reasonable
prerequisite from the point of view of the problem to be tackled”
(Janicki 1990: 55)
I would start the ball rolling towards a conclusion by acknowledging
that language activism is but one way of terminologically describing what are
examples of vivid, complex participation in discourse about language, which
in turn contribute to the generation and regeneration of language ideological
tropes, altogether playing a role in how we conceptualise language varieties,
the politics of language, the interface between language and identity, and
consequent structural change, shift, and variation. At this juncture, I would
state that the observation of social behaviour via interpretive and
ethnographic means throughout the domain of sociolinguistics and linguistic
anthropology will necessarily lead us to want to describe the social life of
language with terms and concepts that are meaningful and that will help the
linguist to develop nuanced theorisation of language in society. For many
linguists, this work will also take place in an effort to solve so-called “language
problems” (Nekvapil 2016: 14), to inform policymakers and political actors in
the development of contemporary language policies (see Vari & Tamburelli
2020), and to challenge dominant power structures, racialised and ethnicised
inequities, and socioeconomic developments which lead to discrimination and
cultural hegemony and have led to endangerment and events of language loss
(Grenoble & Whaley 1998; Wurm 2014). In the post-colonial context, it will
especially be of imperative value—if not morally paramount—for many
linguists to use their work as a matter of social justice and as a way to actively
challenge structurally embedded inequalities where issues of language,
culture and identity all come to the fore (see Piller 2016; Avineri et al. 2019).

217



Discussion and conclusions
The issue at hand is that many linguists desire theorisation—we desire
that the terminology and frameworks we use in our descriptions of language
in social life are relevant and can be identifiable, as “when clear definitions of
[…] concepts are provided, social theory can have direct relevance to the study
of language in real-life social contexts” (Ahearn 2017: 302). The
metapragmatic approach to conceptualising language activism I have
employed in all three of my studies, and have outlined broadly in this final
chapter, leaves the door open to a complementary theoretical perspective
where we are at least cognisant of the risks of carving into stone a normative
declaration of what language activism is. I do not necessarily perceive that
linguists and other social researchers alike make problematic absolutist
statements intentionally, nor that there is necessarily a malign intent to
effectively gate-keep definitions of language activism or language activists. At
least, this never appears to be explicitly the case in extant work on language
activism. However, it is to be expected in social scientific research that its
practitioners are bound to express their findings with terminology and
descriptive devices that need to be seen to be explicitly meaningful, and their
meaning will be effectively informed by the limited description of a given
instance of the phenomenon; likewise, we talk about language activism as a
phenomenon—as a thing—in the social world, so therefore it has to be
something both observable in as far as it has been described a particular way
by various progenitors. This is an inherent continuity:
“The theory of practice as practice insists, contrary to positivist
materialism, that the objects of knowledge are constructed, not
passively recorded, and, contrary to intellectualist idealism, that the
system of structured, structuring dispositions, the habitus, which is

218



Discussion and conclusions
constituted in practice and is always oriented towards particular
functions” (Bourdieu 1995: 32)
The important factor from this stance is that we consider experiences
and our practices as part of a socio-cultural and historical interrelationship,
and that we do not attempt to abstract these events and subjects out from their
informing contexts. As referred to in my Catalan case-study, however, a
“socially embedded” approach to sociolinguistic topics such as this requires us
to start out with the view that when we theorise language and society, we are
neither talking about separable worlds (Bell 2016: 407), nor can we develop
theories that present an ultimate “totalizing view of power” and the factors at
play, and instead we can embrace “a far more layered and fragmented [view],
involving [multiple] actors […] and activities across the entire realm of social
life, and an analysis zooming in on the smallness of situated practices”
(Blommaert 2018: 3). This would necessitate examining language activism
not as a finite or limitable concept in a liminal realm between language-use
and wider social life, but as an interpretative lens on situated practices in
multiple, multifilar and dynamic contexts. Reflecting on this more broadly,
popular conceptualisations of language activism also do not necessarily
depend on the effort on the part of an individual to explicitly identify
themselves as an activist or to explicitly connote what they do as activism.
As brought up in the introduction of this thesis with regard to how an
activist may be associated with other social movements (e.g., Welsh advocacy
vis-à-vis Welsh nationalism) by cultural or political association, the
indexicality of “activism” or “activist” in different contexts may well lead to
active avoidance of the term or needing to specify what sort of activist they
are, and therefore what they are not (cf. ‘Mål’ means ‘språk’; “målaktivist”
versus “språkaktivist”). That is to say, individuals “might not identify as
219



Discussion and conclusions
‘activists’ per se, [yet] most of them would be recognized as such” by wider
society (Lewis 2020: 20). This may be further exhibited by the actions of
someone using Catalan in a context where the use of Catalan has ideological
reflexes of nationalism, independence from Spain, and/or challenging the
normative use of Castilian in certain domains and challenging notions of
legitimate speakership and/or claims to Spanish, Catalan or hybrid identity
between the two (see Pujolar 2020). Likewise, the use of Nynorsk has
frequently been associated with counter-cultural reflexes that have historically
challenged both the once ubiquitous use of Danish (and later, Bokmål) in
domains of written Norwegian, but there are wider tropes linked to scepticism
of Norwegian membership of the European Union, agrarian opposition to
political centralisation, and as featured in this thesis an emerging sympathy
with other minority language causes in popular discourse (see Almenningen
1981). As regards Scots, whilst many do explicitly write and publish in Scots
as a matter of advocacy and cultural autonomy, those who engage with what
has been termed as the “discursive construction” of Scots through its naming
and by giving it academic credence, this also sets the scene for a wide number
of individuals—linguists included—to participate in constructing discourses of
Scots language besides those individuals and collectives who are seen to more
explicitly dedicate their free time or even their careers to sociopolitical
campaigns favourable to Scots (see Unger 2013).
Fundamentally, I have attempted to use my studies to highlight where
the use of the term language activist or language activism neither operates
solely in the realm of “expert metalanguage” nor in the everyday language of
those outside of it—rather a critical appraisal of language activism may
necessitate awareness of how these terms are effectively generated and
renegotiated in public rhetoric and also appropriated by the academy (and
vice versa) to describe various cases of behaviour relevant to structured
220



Discussion and conclusions
taxonomies of language variation, shift, and change (Cameron 1998: 313). A
critical analysis of language activism cannot sufficiently distance the
researcher from the case-study in as far as the terminological devices used to
describe language activism are both varied and do not exist solely in the
purview of the academy nor the general public. From this perhaps more
poststructuralist angle—assuming it makes sense to talk about sociolinguistic
research experiencing a poststructuralist turn (see Tusting 2020)—I do not
believe that a conceptualisation of language activism such as the one I propose
is necessarily radical, given pressure to adoption of more self-aware and
critical conceptualisations of what is meant to speak a “language” versus have
a “communicative repertoire”, or even what fluency or to be multilingual
means in practice in linguistic research—although it does open the door to
theorisation that could embrace anyone being a language activist and that
idealised boundaries between prototypical language activism and wider social
action are effectively broken down and significantly diluted (Gilmore 2011:
122; see also Jaffe 2007; Makoni 2011; Piller 2016).
On these aforementioned grounds, language activism as a concept may
encompass both explicit participatory activity and perceived phenomena by
virtue of the way that social action (with indexical relationships to languageadjacent topics) becomes meaningful in context. Put another way, language
activism may well have the potential to extend to the social action of anyone
by virtue of what it could metapragmatically represent. At this final stage of
this doctoral thesis, my hypothesis is that it is feasible—at least using a
metapragmatic, discourse-oriented lens to describe social action—to apply the
same kind of analysis of language activism on explicit revitalisation and
advocacy efforts as on the periphery which encompasses not just associated
cultural or political events but also wider social action and language-use.

221



Discussion and conclusions
Nevertheless, to argue that language activism is essentially ubiquitous
could well prove contentious. What are the effective ramifications of
effectively deconstructing language activism so far as to not distinguish it from
any other form of behaviour? To follow this line of thought may defeat the
point of wanting theorise language activism in a sufficient and rigorous
manner, especially in exercises which endeavour to identify those who are
active in issues of language reclamation, revitalisation, and many other
embodiments of social action with regard to language, culture and identity (cf.
Meek 2011; Hornberger 2017; Patton 2020). Hereafter, linguistic behaviour
is social behaviour, and its analysis can benefit from further ethnographic
introspection—further critical “observations of action” (Blommaert 2018: 5)—
to draw out inevitable complexities and keep conversations like the one in this
thesis going. After all, not only will many forms of social action be perceived
as language activism, but linguistic and language-related behaviour requires
social actors to necessarily participate in the metadiscourses that inform their
conceptualisation of language, how they use language, how others use
language, whether a language is conceptualised in society as a language, or
the status and allocation of cultural capital and resources to a named language
variety within the constraints of the sociopolitical institutions they build
around them.
As others may ponder about what necessarily distinguishes activism
from social action, I have proposed across all three articles that we are witness
to cases of intervention in the metapragmatic space, where language-use and
other related behaviours are meaningful within the context of extant
metadiscourses. A non-essentialist conceptualisation of language activism and
language activists may offer the researcher a less rigid set of tools to work
with, and the capacity to extend analyses of prototypical language activism to
the realm of the linguistic subject, wider reflexes of sociolinguistic discourse
222



Discussion and conclusions
and both political and cultural tropes which reinforce, challenge, reify and
deconstruct the way in which language is used in social life.
As a matter of principle, the study of language activism, regardless of
the theoretical persuasion of the researcher, necessitates the observation of
transient, complex human beings and their limitless capacity for social
interaction with one another through language and other cultural means. The
original idea I ran with—that one could attempt to peg down an exact
definition of who an activist is or what constitutes activism, and that one could
do this within the constraints of a doctoral thesis—is a challenging goal to set
oneself. Yet, any desire and willingness to do so is part of the theorising nature
of this subject, and it would prove ineffective to aggressively campaign against
those who wish to typologise and frame social phenomena in a way that
deepens our collective understanding of not just ourselves, but the cultural,
political and social structures that govern everyday life, and as is pertinent to
this thesis, the life of language within social discourse. This is part and parcel
of the academic experience; to speak of language activism or any other
phenomenon is to refer to a concept within the usual “hegemonic modes of
understanding” linguists and other academics operate within (Zienkowski
2016: 10). These modes of understanding can be challenged and reappraised
along one’s research journey.
“Language activism” and “language activist”, whilst forming part of
formalised language policy and planning frameworks in the past and being the
focus of various papers and monographs across different disciplines, are still
relative terms of convenience for linguists and other academic practitioners.
Fuzzy terms indeed, and by no means is this an issue unique to theoretical
discussions of this specific concept and the ongoing nature of language
variation, change and shift. We can continue to hypothesise and draw out
thicker, more detailed descriptions of this phenomenon and others, but we
223



Discussion and conclusions
must remain conscious that definitions and conceptualisations of language in
social life are continually generated and reinterpreted along a perpetual chain
of varying, complimentary descriptions. The questions to ask are perhaps not
what language activism is or who language activists are, and I would warn
against the uncritical use of definitions or assumptions about the nature of
language activism without first acknowledging the limitless capacity for
subjects to act and the metapragmatics of language-use and other situated
practices. Instead, the matter at hand is to promote the view—and indeed the
principle—that any sociolinguistic concept, and the terminology used to
describe it, is by necessity imprecise in an imprecise world of multiple actors
existing within diverse relationships and engaging with dynamic social action
and linguistic practices.

5.7.

Linguist or activist: some personal reflections

As a supplementary commentary, I would like to take the opportunity to reflect
in broader, autoethnographic terms about my research journey. This is less
grounded in my wider theoretical discussion, and more so a personal
commentary on what I have been first-hand witness to both before and during
my observational fieldwork and interviews. The reader will know by now that
one article is already fully published, a second has been revised and
resubmitted, and the remaining one is still under review; it is a laborious and
exhausting process to compartmentalise ethnographic work into article-sized
chunks, especially when so much context and rapport-building has to be
condensed as part of the writing process. The ethnographic routes I had taken
whilst undertaking this doctoral research would not be what they are, were it
not for the fortunate contacts I have built over time and my own political
activity back home. As part of the peer-review process, aspects of who I am,
what I have done, and where I have been have to be sufficiently anonymised,
224



Discussion and conclusions
which often puts a damper on my ability to truly express the level of contact I
have had with those I have observed and the individuals I have spoken to.
There is also the question of how to properly account for other formative
experiences I have had outwith the four years it has taken to put this work
together. For example, my current positionality within Nynorsk circles likely
would not have been what it is, had I not been interviewed on various
occasions in 2015 and 2016 in the Norwegian media about my use of Nynorsk
as a foreign-born individual. From that moment on, I too became clearly
embedded within the activist circles I was simultaneously investigating, and I
had never doubted from that moment on that I would be perceived by others
in Norwegian society as yet another “målungdom” with opinions, perhaps with
a personal vendetta against Bokmål, very strong opinions about the European
Union, or a disdain for the supposed Americanisation of Norwegian society. In
truth, over time it has become clearer to me that whilst these tropes might
have a modicum of truth when it comes to what (some) Nynorsk activists
believe, the people I know and the friends I have within the wider Nynorsk
movement have a variety of opinions and stances on different topics.
Clearly not all of them were from rural municipalities, a handful spoke
languages other than Norwegian at home and with their families, and it was
not uncommon to meet members of Norsk Målungdom who still used Bokmål
in their daily lives, or who perhaps were not confident Nynorsk users. Rather,
what brought them into målrørsla-circles was their sympathy with the goals of
the organisation—be it Noregs Mållag or Norsk Målungdom—and their
enthusiasm for the campaigns that were happening at the time. Yes, the
Nynorsk movement has been defined at various points in its modern history
by its political radicalism and status as a movement of political pressure in
Norwegian civil society, but I have found it important at various times to
remind myself that whilst the people I observe and interview constitute a
225



Discussion and conclusions
formative whole, they as individuals do not all share the same background and
identical political motivations. Reflecting back on an interview I used in my
undergraduate Honours dissertation, I vividly remember one of my informants
explaining that they did not see themselves strictly as a Nynorsk activist, but
as an “organisasjonsmenneske”—an organisation-person—someone who
enjoys being part of a group, and also likely belonging to a community. It helps
to remind myself at times that the people I speak to are more placidly engaged
as activists—if they see themselves as activists at all, that is.
***
In 2014, I participated in a Catalan language summer school in Andorra and
Girona, and explicitly remember having to answer to a frustrated café worker
in an airport—in Catalonia—why I had decided to place my order in Catalan
and not Castilian, which he appeared to have taken badly; this might suggest
he was not accustomed to being talked to in Catalan by customers, and/or as
one of my papers discusses, he would have expected that I should switch to
Castilian as a matter of courtesy or politeness. One might want to put this
interaction in wider context, however. At the end of the day, I had just ended
two weeks of intense Catalan language immersion with a group of other
foreign-born learners and had been encouraged to use Catalan when in shops,
restaurants, and cafés throughout. To end my trip by using Castilian or
English, and not Catalan, in a setting where signage was clearly in Catalan,
and many other travellers in the airport were themselves Catalan-speaking
residents of Catalonia—well, I would think that it would have contradicted
the linguistic self-confidence that had only just been built up through my
participation in this summer school.

226



Discussion and conclusions
I carry this experience (amongst others) in the back of my head
whenever travelling to a Catalan-speaking destination, and despite only ever
having been nothing more than a tourist during these opportunities, it is
something that has implicated me in routinely and explicitly using Catalan
with my interlocutors even when it is least expected of a pale, blond-haired
foreigner. To say that I ever embarked on my academic research in Catalonia
with purely academic curiosity would completely wash over these earlier
experiences that inform my attitudes to Castilian-Catalan code-switching in
amongst the broader dynamics of Catalonia’s sociolinguistic culture and
ongoing trajectory. I very much regret that I was not able to continue my
Catalan fieldwork, and it still feels that it was a premature decision to draw a
line under it despite the capacity of this thesis to offer a (hopefully) compelling
comparison of Catalan language topics especially with my Nynorsk work.
Had the articles been written in a different order, I may have been able
to incorporate my observations from earlier this summer when I was in
Catalonia once more for what had been meant to be a little writing and
marking retreat, but then abruptly also became another opportunity to meet
with Catalan nationalists and language activists. I mention earlier in this thesis
that I was also actively involved in Scottish politics as an executive member of
a party which currently forms part of the Scottish Parliament’s current proindependence majority and governing administration, and in this capacity, I
had earlier met in Glasgow the then-president of Assemblea Nacional Catalana,
Elisenda Paluzie. During my visit to Barcelona, I was then invited by her and
the organisation to attend a pro-independence demonstration in Vic, yet this
was also shadowed by yet more public debate about the role of the Castilian
language in publicly funded schools in Catalonia. As part of the demonstration
in the town square, a banner was unfurled with the slogan El català ets tu.

227



Discussion and conclusions
Parla’l.38 I was promptly invited to meet with a retired Catalan language
teacher, Jaume Sastre, who was on hunger strike in protest against decisions
by the Spanish courts to insist that a proportion of Catalan schooling should
be done in Castilian, which in effect would end the system of Catalan language
immersion pioneered by the Catalan government after the death of Franco and
Spanish constitutional reform.
I mention all of this because, in truth, I was not exactly sure what
proverbial hat I was meant to be wearing, or indeed, should have been
wearing; Paluzie referred to me in a tweet as both a co-ordinator of the
Scottish Greens and a PhD candidate in linguistics, but when I think about
what I was actually doing at the time, I struggle to come to terms with whether
I was attending the demonstration and visiting Sastre as a linguist, a politician,
both, or something else.39 This is also very much the case with my involvement
in Scots language circles, because my involvement in Scottish politics is
already explicit, yet I am also engaged in academic research which deals with
a disputed language variety. Contemplating exactly how I am meant to
sufficiently triangulate my research with my politics as a qualitative
sociolinguist has been a headache and constant concern throughout the
writing of this thesis, and I would assume that the only way I can know if I
have gone about this work in the right way will depend ultimately on its
reception by other linguists.
Altogether, however, undertaking this research and—if anything else—
capitalising on my rather unique positionality has allowed me to be involved
in particularly gripping interactions across three different geopolitical
contexts. I am unbelievably fortunate to have access to these spaces, although

38

“The Catalan language is you / The Catalan is you. Speak it [the Catalan language].”

39

https://twitter.com/epaluzie/status/1518326809493975042 (accessed 31 August 2022)

228



Discussion and conclusions
I have been constantly aware (and often quite fearful) of the repercussions of
my methodological choices and relationship with the subject matter. That I
have been able to present some of this work at international conferences
should hopefully be testament enough that I can speak openly about my
findings and extract from them theoretical observations that may contribute
to discussions about not just how we conceptualise language activists and
activism itself, but how we conceptualise the linguistic subject (you the reader,
me, “linguists” and “non-linguists” alike) in dynamic, complex, ideologicallyladen spaces of discourse and social action. I believe I have concluded writing
(and then amending) this thesis just as much as a linguist (of sorts) as I have
as an activist (of sorts). But in the grand scheme of things, I must remind
myself that I am only a product of my social connections, cultural awareness,
and communicative repertoire: just another linguistic subject existing in
manifold, dynamic social contexts. That I call myself one thing or another, or
that I am perceived as such by others, is not the be-all and end-all of my own
character or social role.

Edinburgh, 5 May 2023

229



