Journeys in the Postcolonial City:
Re-imagining Spatial Politics in Paris and Brussels

El



Introduction: Outlining Focus

It is night with glaring sunshine. I stand in the woods and look
towards my house with its misty blue walls. As though I were
recently dead and saw the house from a new angle.
It has stood for more than eighty summers. Its timber has been
impregnated, four times with joy and three times with sorrow. When
someone who has lived in the house dies it is repainted. The dead
person paints it himself, without a brush, from the inside.
It is always so early in here, before the crossroads, before the
irrevocable choices. I am grateful for this life, and yet I miss the
alternatives. All sketches wish to be real.
A motor far out on the water extends the horizon of the summer
night. Both joy and sorrow swell in the magnifying glass of the dew.
We do not actually know it, but we sense it: our life has a sister
vessel which plies an entirely different route.
While the sun burns behind the islands.
(Thomas Tranströmer)

This thesis is concerned with the ways in which legacies of colonial history
are explored in the cities of Paris and Brussels, and how grassroots level (or
community) commemorative practices allow for a more nuanced
understanding of physical and virtual space to emerge. As part of this
process of re-imagining postcolonial legacies in the present day, I argue that
a more nuanced understanding of the historical weight that spaces can hold
helps, in turn, to shed light on the complex way that we grieve, and the way

2

Thomas Tranströmer, ‘The Blue House’, in For the Living and the Dead: Poems and a
Memoir (New York: Harper Collins, 1995), p. 12.

12

2



that the spaces around us are changed as a result of that grief. The need to
develop the relationship between landscape and forms of loss underpins ‘The
Blue House’, by Swedish poet Thomas Tranströmer. Over the course of the
poem, he returns to the landscapes of his youth to explore the ties between
loss and physical places in a way that directly corroborates my own
conception of the ties between grief and space here. He considers, aptly,
that:
When someone who has lived in a house dies it is repainted. The
dead person paints it himself, without a brush, from the inside. On
the other side [of the house] is open terrain. Formerly a garden,
now wilderness.3
Although Tranströmer draws on the image of a blue house glimpsed from a
forest on a dark night, his poem encourages us to think more broadly about
how missing people change the material fabric of real or imagined worlds.
When the unnamed protagonist looks at his re-painted house with its misty
blue walls, it is ‘as if I had just died and was seeing the house from a new
angle’.4 His house does not simply have a new form, or colour, but a
completely new way of being seen. This central image of a man in the trees
takes on both a lyrical and instructive quality. The poem suggests that there
is a transformative power in looking at the supposedly familiar from a new
perspective. In the end, the blue house is a reminder that personal insight
can only be gained through recognising what cannot necessarily by seen with
one’s own eyes. What remains, instead, is the instinctive sense of the
unseen, of parallel phantom lives for which we sometimes long and miss: an
3
4

Tranströmer, p. 12.
Ibid.

13



understanding of both the possibility of an alternate reading of history and the
indelible marks left behind by loss in the present day.
Whilst Tranströmer’s conceptualisation of grief is rooted in the forests, lakes
and proverbs of his native Sweden, his invocation of the invisible traces of
absence resonates with something much deeper about how loss is
experienced in space, or how spaces can hold hidden meanings. I suggest it
can speak to the ways in which half-sensed lives come back to haunt us,
drawing on the ways that former colonial capitals or centres of power hold
traces of crimes that were committed in or from there, becoming spaces
populated with phantom traces that seem to allude directly to what Fiona
Barclay calls ‘the function of ghosts within the ex-colonizers society’.5
This is the sentiment from which I wish to begin my own intervention into
Francophone Postcolonial Studies and which guides much of my thinking
across the following pages. In her own conception of loss, Judith Butler
writes that part of the potency of grief in an affective and subjective sense is
that it can change and re-shape what we thought to be true, as well as how it
was possible to live and be in the world. She writes:
I think instead that one mourns when one accepts the fact that the
loss one undergoes will be one which changes you, changes you
possibly forever, and that mourning has to do with agreeing to
undergo a transformation the full result of which you cannot know in

5

See: Fiona Barclay, Writing Postcolonial France: Haunting, Literature and the Maghreb,
(Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2011), p. 153. It should be noted that Barclay’s reference to
the spectral is in relation to the way in which France has failed to come to terms with the end
of its empire, and is now haunted by the legacy of its colonial relationship with North Africa.
My own understanding of ghosts differs somewhat and will be unpacked further in following
pages.

14



advance. So there is losing, and there is the transformative effect of
loss, and this latter cannot be charted or planned.
I think you get hit by waves, and that you start out the day, with
an aim, a project, a plan, and you find yourself foiled. You find
yourself fallen. You’re exhausted, and you don’t know why.
Something is larger than your own deliberate plan, your own
project, your own knowing. Something takes hold of you, and what
sense does this make?6
Whilst this thesis is not specifically concerned with theories of grief, I think it
is necessary to consider how Butler’s thinking about loss opens up new ways
of thinking about loss in the capital cities of the former colonial powers, and
how it is relevant to questions of postcolonial memory (or indeed an absence
thereof) within Francophone Postcolonial Studies. Why, indeed, should an
engagement with grief be central to an analysis of present-day Paris and
Brussels at all?
The answer, I believe is two-fold. Firstly, Butler’s poignant evocation of grief
invites us to consider the magnitude of loss in all of its totality. Indeed, a
common thread between her image of ‘something larger than a deliberate
plan’ and Tranströmer’s vision of phantom ships is the clear sense that
artistic and socially engaged visions of loss and grief are key to
understanding an uncharted world left behind in the wake of loss, and the
ways we go about physically navigating grief. This is a key thread that will
underpin this thesis. Secondly, by bringing together different models of
conceptualising absence, the types of loss held in evocative images of
painted houses and waves of grief can start to take on real forms and be

6

Judith Butler, Precarious Life: The Powers of Mourning and Violence (London: Verso,
2004), p. 23.

15



understood in different ways. I argue that we can take this idea further in the
context of Francophone Postcolonial Studies by seeking out new objects of
study that seek to bring to light the stories of those whose lives were lost at
the hands of state-sanctioned violence, and whose lives are still grieved (and
whose absence is still felt) in the present day. By seeking a crossdisciplinary, mixed methods understanding of how violent historical legacies
can be worked through in present-day city spaces, researchers and actors in
our field can then re-direct attention to legacies of colonial crimes that are
being acknowledged (or re-imagined) through art, activism and community or
collective projects.

I.

Conceptualising Ghosts and Haunting

In order to begin theorising city space as a site of grief — and the role of
haunting absences within them — it is necessary to begin by first taking time
to unpack what I understand ghosts to look like in the context of this thesis,
and to unpack the investigations of ‘spectral traces’ which I see to be a
shared point of departure for my intervention in both Paris and Brussels. I
see ghosts not simply as an imprint of a departed soul, but as a reminder of
injustices that have yet to be redressed, of amnesia surrounding absent
people and places, and as a legacy of suffering that has yet to be
acknowledged on an official or national level. Ghosts, I argue, can also be
emblems of amnesia: a reminder of the way city spaces can hold invisible
traces of absence. They become a means by which to extend Butler’s
thinking about the unchartered or unknowable dimensions of loss, and they

16



hold a different affective weight for each individual who moves through them.
By expanding this definition of the ghost to encompass questions of
postcolonial memory and haunting, this thesis will allow both for a more
nuanced spatial reading of Paris and Brussels and propose cross-disciplinary
approaches to conceptualising both cities in Francophone Postcolonial
Studies.
Before I move on to outline why I chose Paris and Brussels as the basis of
this thesis (and go into more detail about the case studies on which I draw
and the historical context that underpins them), I believe it is necessary to
develop the idea of what haunting means in the context of this thesis, and to
draw on a selection of scholarly interventions that help to illustrate this.
In what is arguably the seminal work on haunting and memory within the
realm of Francophone Postcolonial Studies, Derrida’s Spectres de Marx calls
on the reader to endeavour to speak and listen to ghosts, despite the
reluctance inherited from our intellectual traditions and because of the
challenge it may pose to them. When thinking about what this conversation
might look like, he writes:
Or ce qui paraît presque impossible, c’est toujours de
parler du spectre, de parler au spectre, de parler avec lui, donc
surtout de faire ou de laisser parler un esprit.7
In Hauntology, Spectres and Phantoms, Colin Davis builds directly on
Derrida’s vision of the need to dialogue with spectres, positioning it not
simply as a process of active conversation (or a literal exchange of words),

7

Jacques Derrida, Spectres de Marx, (Paris: Editions Galileé, 1993), p. 46.

17



but rather as process of understanding, or dismantling pre-conceived ideas
about the past and the impact that this can have on us in the present. He
ultimately suggests that:
Conversing with spectres is not undertaken in the expectation that
they will reveal some secret, shameful or otherwise. Rather, it may
open us up to the experience of secrecy as such: an essential
unknowing which underlies and may undermine what we think we
know.8
Conversing with spectres then, if we follow Davis’s thinking, is less about a
pursuit of previously disavowed knowledge (although this can arguably be a
secondary product), but more of an openness to a type of dialogue that
seeks to challenge. Indeed, Davis goes on to argue that haunting can be
seen, in part, as:
The structural openness or address directed towards the living by
the voices of the past or the not yet formulated possibilities of the
future. The secret is not unspeakable because it is taboo, but
because it cannot not (yet) be articulated in the languages available
to us. The ghost pushes at the boundaries of language and
thought.9
Over the course of this thesis, I will build on Davis’s understanding of
haunting as a process of dialogue with the people and events that have come
before us, and as a new way that personal and collective loss can be
understood. I will suggest, as Davis argues, that rather than fearing an
exposure of our secrets, ‘the process of haunting should also be one of

8

Colin Davis, ‘Hauntology, Spectres and Phantoms’, French Studies, 59 (2005), 373–79, (p.
373).
9
Davis, p. 379.

18



experiencing the unknown and turning towards the subjective stories of
memory and loss that an engagement with the spectral can uncover’.10
In Ghostly Psychoanalysis, Stephen Frosh corroborates Davis’s vision of a
need to interrogate our understanding of past events and legacies by
explaining that the mysteries of our ghosts must be identified, appeased and
laid to rest. This process, he suggests, is not just a matter of naming that
which is frightening or haunting, but also of understanding what ‘exactly it is
that we are afraid of, or afraid to remember’.11 Through this act of recognition
(which, he argues, can take many forms of ‘working through’) our ghost
grows in substance ‘and certainty precisely in order that it can be later
dissolved’.12
These definitions of haunting and ghosts put forward by Davis and Frosh,
respectively, are certainly not absent from, or irrelevant to, long-standing
debates surrounding postcolonial memory within a Francophone context.
Indeed, Patrick Chamoiseau and Rodolphe Hammadi’s ‘Guyane: Tracesmémoires du bagne’ picks up on this sense of disavowed narratives
demanding space to recognised, exploring how official monuments and
documents addressing colonial history might have been written differently so
that erased narratives and perspectives — forgotten legacies of colonial
crimes — might be heard anew.13 Through text and image, Chamoiseau and

10

Davis, p. 378.
Stephen Frosh, Hauntings: Psychoanalysis and Ghostly Transmissions Studies in the
Psychosocial (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013), p. 12.
12
Frosh, p. 14.
13
Max Silverman, ‘Patrick Chamoiseau and Rodolphe Hammadi’s “Guyane: Tracesmémoires du bagne”’, in Nœuds de mémoire: Multidirectional Memory in Postwar French
11

19



Hammadi transform the narrowly circumscribed surface of the ruins of a
former penal colony into what Max Silverman would later describe as ‘a
complex network of echoes and reverberations across space’ to create ‘a
hybrid and multivalent vision of a memory trace’.14 According to Silverman, a
memory trace or la trace mémoire is,
always haunted by a past; they are present but also bear witness to
an absence. In the here and now but in the process of sinking into
oblivion, they inhabit an in-between state, between past and
present, presence and absence, visibility and invisibility.15
Maeve McCusker builds on Silverman’s vision on memory traces by
suggesting that hidden places of memory take on a ghostly quality
throughout Chamoiseau’s writings. She suggests that it is this spectral
undertone that, in turn, permeates the reader’s understanding of the locations
that are being described. The spaces themselves, she argues, become
imbued with the spectral trace of the forgotten legacies or the stories that
could have been. She writes: ‘These places have a peculiarly spectral and
uncanny quality in Chamoiseau’s work, at once familiar and unfamiliar,
representing what Freud would describe as that which “ought to remain
hidden but which has come to light”.’16
Leading on from Silverman and McCusker, I argue that by deliberately
turning our attention to spectral presences — or memory traces — at work in

and Francophone Culture, ed. by Michael Rothberg, Debarati Sanyal and Max Silverman,
Yale French Studies, 118/119 (2010), 225–38, (p.226).
14
Silverman, p. 228.
15
Silverman, p. 228.
16
Maeve McCusker, Patrick Chamoiseau: Recovering Memory (Liverpool: Liverpool
University Press, 2007), p. 103.

20



city spaces, we can move closer to writing the story of what could have been,
and move towards a version of history that takes into account that which we
prefer not to remember, enriched by a deeper understanding of the links
between memory and space. Doing so can allow us to develop alternative
models of analysis that elevate legacies and voices that historically have
been consigned to silence. In order for new journeys to be carried out in the
postcolonial city, be it by researchers or individuals moving through the city, I
posit that an awareness of, and a sensitivity to, the haunting quality of
colonial history and the affective traces left by those lives that have been lost,
represents a crucial juncture for researchers in our field. By challenging or
subverting established notions of space (and understanding the way that
‘certain lives are endangered or not honoured’ within it) we can disrupt
established national memorial lives, and choices about which lives are
commemorated and which lives are consigned to silence.17
By moving closer to the spectral undertones (traces mémoires), this thesis
will shine a light on activist, artist and walking-based activities that are
working to ensure that the stories of those whose lives were lost at the hands
of state-sanctioned violence can be brought to light. At the heart of this
process is a sense that the haunting quality of colonial memory demands
recognition not simply out of a need to redress historical crimes and atone for
years of state-backed silence, but out of an innate sense of the closeness
between those forgotten stories and our present-day lives. Rather than being

17

Claire Chambers and Graham Huggan, ‘Reevaluating the Postcolonial City: Production,
Reconstruction, Representation’, Interventions, 17 (2015), 783–88, (p.784).

21



a process to be feared and pushed away, I believe that haunting exposes the
porous connections between the living and the dead, between national
memory narratives and the traces mémoires that are just waiting to be found,
if only we know where to look.
I suggest that absence is relational because it is so subjective. In The Matter
of Absence, Lars Frers reminds us of this innate connectedness that
underpins any experience of absence or loss. As he reminds us, absence, by
its very nature, ‘must be felt’.18 He goes on to argue that ‘a person, you or I,
must miss someone else to register that they are no longer fully present here,
now, in this instant. Someone has to be missing, something must not “feel”
19

right’. I suggest that by incorporating this relational quality of absence into
our present-day experiences, social interactions and social positions can be
understood not simply as being abstract blocks of time or succession of facts,
but rather as being powered by specific memories and occurrences of
absence. As Frers and Sigvardsdotter remind us, this relational character of
absence is self-contained and self-evident. It is reflected in the etymology of
the word itself, which derives from the Latin roots 'ab-' (from, away) and
‘esse’ (to be).20 To be absent, someone or something has to be experienced
as being distanced from the place and time that they were experienced.

18

Lars Frers, ‘The Matter of Absence’, Cultural Geographies, 20 (2013), 423–30, (p.424).
Frers, p. 423
20
Lars Meier, Lars Frers and Erika Sigvardsdotter, ‘The Importance of Absence in the
Present: Practices of Remembrance and the Contestation of Absences’, Cultural
Geographies, 20 (2013), 423–30 (p.424).
19

22



II.

Historical Context

What is it that makes the cities of Paris and Brussels interesting points of
departure for this reframing of conversations around spectral traces, memory
and city spaces? What are the lessons or forgotten legacies that are hidden
within them that make them particularly worthy of attention and scholarly
engagement?
McMaster and House’s seminal work Paris 1961: Algerians, State Terror, and
Memory outlines how, on 17th October 1961, hundreds of unarmed Algerian
protestors gathered in various locations across Paris, as part of an anticurfew demonstration organised by the FLN (Front de Libération National),
which had been gathering momentum over the course of that month. Entire
families had moved across different arrondissements to protest the
repressive curfew laws instated by Papon, who had served as the Préfet
Regional in Constantine up until 1958.21 Under these new restrictions, any
members of the so-called ‘franco-musulman’ or ‘French Muslim’ community
were not allowed to leave their homes or use their vehicles between the
hours of 8.30pm and 5.00am, and their businesses were required to be
closed by 7pm. Although the FLN had explicitly called on protestors to
demonstrate peacefully during (and on the days leading up to) the 17th
October 1961, their presence was met by disproportionately brutal levels of
police violence. Between 6pm and 7pm, protestors were thrown into the

21

During World War II, Papon served as a senior police official in the Vichy Régime. He was
the second official in the Bordeaux region (the secretary-general of the prefecture of
Gironde) and the supervisor of its Service for Jewish Questions.

23



Seine over the sides of the Pont St Michel, Pont Neuilly and Pont Clichy.
Some were rounded up on RATP buses, at Metro stations, or held in centres
at Drancy (home of Jewish internment centres during the Second World
War). Others were taken to Orly airport to board planes back to Algeria. It is
estimated that between 200 to 300 Algerians were detained, and that 70 to
84 additional people drowned after having been thrown into the Seine.22
Despite their differences in location and historical relationships to colonialism
and postcolonial migration, I argue that both the 17th October 1961
massacre and the assassination of Lumumba bring to light broader questions
of the role played by postcolonial memory in Paris and Brussels. They also
present compelling sites from which to re-examine questions of historical
haunting, memory and space in new ways. The reasons for this are two-fold.
Firstly, the absence of adequate memorialisation of colonial crimes —
notably, the 17th October 1961 massacre at the hands of the French police in
Paris and the murder of Patrice Lumumba (17th January 1961) by the
Belgian authorities — is an obvious common denominator that unites both
cities.23 The lingering memories of the brutality of Lumumba’s death at the
22

Similarly, the 2001 Taubira Law saw the State officially qualify slavery as a ‘crime against
humanity’ and marked a significant step — in legal terms — to addressing the legacy of
France’s imperial rule. Three years later, in April 2004 the (first) loi Taubira was followed by
the recommendation of the Comité pour la mémoire de l’esclavage to create a national day
of commemoration. See: Doris L. Garraway, ‘Memory as Reparation? The Politics of
Remembering Slavery in France from Abolition to the Loi Taubira (2001)’, International
Journal of Francophone Studies, 11 (2008), 365–86.
23
One crucial difference to note is the disparity in present-day migrant population make up.
As a result of trade agreements signed between Belgium, Turkey and Morocco in 1964,
Belgium (unlike France) continued to offer legal provisions to attract and stabilise Moroccan
and Turkish workers up until 2011, when an amendment to the law on family reunification
was passed introducing a mandatory income threshold for the Belgian sponsor. See: Milica
Petrovic, ‘Belgium: A Country of Permanent Immigration’, Institute of Migration Policy, 12
November 2012, https://www.migrationpolicy.org/article/belgium-country-permanentimmigration (accessed 1 June 2022). By contrast, the French government officially ended its

24



hands of senior Belgian officers (which included his body being chopped into
pieces before being burnt by sulphuric acid), have remained a continuous
shadow over relationships between the DRC and Belgium.
Despite the obvious differences and geo-political context, I argue that this
unifying thread of state-backed amnesia that stretches from both France and
Belgium outwards to their former colonies (including the present-day DRC
and Algeria, respectively) can provide us with a compelling point of
convergence around the theme of postcolonial memory. More specifically, I
argue that the examples of 17th October 1961 and the legacy of the
assassination of Patrice Lumumba provide compelling examples of how
colonial legacies are tended to in former colonial capitals, while shining a
light on the different readings of history that can emerge as a result of artistic
or activist interventions.
Secondly, the narratives surrounding each city’s links to colonial violence and
legacies have too-often been eclipsed by the shadow of the 2015–16 attacks
by the so-called Islamic state that took place in both cities within weeks of
each other. Whilst these cities are in many ways bound by European-wide
and highly mediatised legacy of terrorist violence, as well as the unequal

labour migration programs in 1974 and imposed harsher sanctions for employers who hired
illegal immigrants, leading to the restrictive Pasqua laws of the 1990s, which sought to curtail
family reunification. See: Kimberly Hamilton, Patrick Simon, Clara Veniard, ‘The Challenge of
French Diversity’, Institute of Migration Policy, 1 November 2004,
https://www.migrationpolicy.org/article/challenge-french-diversity (accessed 25 January
2023). Former French president Nicolas Sarkozy would go on to cement both migration and
immigration restrictions with his ‘Loi du 24 juillet 2006’. This law introduced capability-based
requirements and competency assessments as a means of curtailing immigration; a
phenomenon commonly referred to as selective immigration or ‘immigration choisie’. See:
‘Loi n° 2006-911 du 24 juillet 2006 relative à l'immigration et à l'intégration (1)’, 24 July 2006,
https://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/loda/id/JORFTEXT000000266495 (accessed 25 January
2023).

25



ways that certain acts of violence are held up as ‘grievable’ (or not), they
crucially have distinctly different relationships to their former colonial
territories. When explored in the context of innovative new cultural practices
— such as activist movements, interactive art or walking tours — it is
therefore of interest to observe what memories of each city’s colonial past
are revealed, and to ask what common lessons can these two very different
former colonial capitals teach us about the steps needed to commemorate
legacies that are largely absent from national memory narratives?
Concerns about what episodes, or types of lives, are enshrined into the
national political landscape go back a long way in both the French and
Belgian contexts and demand further attention here. They also provide a
simultaneous point of convergence, and divergence between the two. In
France’s case, Vincent Martigny has noted the willingness under Jacques
Chirac’s presidency to make official apologies for the mass round up of Jews
at the Vélodrome d’Hiver in 1942 and the Sétif massacre of 1945 during the
Algerian war. However, as Charles Forsdick reminds us, this decision proved
‘unpopular with older, conservative voters nostalgic for France's status as a
great colonial power and who saw such concessions as a sign of the
country's weakness and decline.’24 Indeed, Forsdick suggested that former
President Sarkozy's rejection of any critical ‘repentance’ during his term in
office ‘was a result of both his desire to differentiate himself from his party

24

Charles Forsdick, ‘The French Empire’, in The Routledge Companion to Postcolonial
Studies, ed. by John McLeod (Abingdon: Routledge, 2007), pp. 32–45 (p.33).

26



rival Chirac, and his desire to avoid alienating a key section of his electorate
in the same way.’25
Barcellini’s consideration of the role of memory in French political life can
also help shed some light on the origins of this uneasy relationship with
historical crimes, arguing that: ‘L’État républicain est [avant tout] un acteur de
mémoire qui masque son interventionnisme derrière une législation
administrative diversifiée et foisonnante.’26 Key to understanding the climate
in which national responses to the 17th October 1961 massacre, and other
French colonial legacies emerge from today, is Barcellini’s thinking about the
tensions surrounding both the creation of French national narratives, and the
construction of a memorial context where certain crimes are not apologised
or accounted for. A key part of this, Barcellini argues, comes from
‘L’émergence des victimes comme moteur de la vie mémorielle française’, a
process which he suggests has two primary consequences.27
La première concerne les héros du temps des « Morts pour la
France ». Les résistants et ceux qui furent leurs aiguillons
mémorielles, les déportés résistants, sont marginalisés. La Journée
de la déportation du dernier dimanche du mois d’avril, consacrée
essentiellement aux déportés résistants, devient progressivement
un non-événement. Mais surtout la troisième génération du feu,
celle de la guerre d’Algérie, qui croyait, à l’imitation des deux

25

Forsdick, The French Empire, p. 15.
Serge Barcellini, ‘L'État républicain, acteur de mémoire: des morts pour la France aux
morts à cause de la France’, in Les Guerres de Mémoires. La France et son histoire. Enjeux
politiques, controverses historiques, stratégies médiatiques, ed. by Pascal Blanchard and
Isabelle Veyrat-Masson (Paris: La Découverte, 2008), pp. 209–19 (p. 209). These ideas are
also referenced in Panivong Norindr, ‘La plus grande France: French cultural identity and
nation building under Mitterrand’, in Identity Papers: Contested Nationhood in TwentiethCentury France, ed. by Steven Ungar and Tom Conley (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 1996), pp. 233–58.
27
Barcellini, p. 216.
26

27



précédentes, imposer sa journée commémorative à l’État,
échoue.28
The state’s continued silence and lack of action surrounding the memory of
certain legacies — or drawing more attention to certain acts of violence over
others — all help to reinforce Barcellini’s vision of a republican memory
narrative as something that is both selectively curated and dependent on the
political aims of individual presidencies. Understanding the state’s role as a
perpetrator of certain crimes is crucial in order to unpick how legacies
including the 17th October can be worked through and recognised in French
society today.
For those determined to unpick these legacies, historian Jean-Luc Einaudi
offers us a glimpse of the scale of the task at hand through the pivotal
evidence and research shedding new light on the long-silenced legacy of the
17th October 1961 massacre in Paris.29 Einaudi’s findings highlight a
sustained culture of silence and concealment, which has fed into the
understanding of the 17th October 1961.
As Einaudi reminds us, the silence and the suppression around the events of
the 17th October 1961 massacre has led to a gap in public understanding,
leading to what Lia Brozgal has described as the city becoming ‘illegible’.
With respect to the 17th October 1961 massacre, she writes: ‘The city bears
only the faintest traces of the event and its afterlives; few if any signs attest to

28

Barcellini, p. 216.
See a more detailed account in Jim House and Neil McMaster, Paris 1961: Algerians,
State Terror and Memory (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006) and Jean-Luc Einaudi, La
Bataille de Paris: 17 Octobre 1961 (Paris: Seuil, 1999).

29

28



the nature of the repression or the lives lost.’30 This lack of attention she
suggests, requires us to see the city as ‘scriptable, insofar as it impels, even
requires, the reader’s participation in its creation.’31 Brozgal’s thinking about
the faint traces of the massacre opens up a natural dialogue of
Chamoiseau’s traces-mémoires (or what McCusker refers to as ’memory
traces’). Both, I suggest act as a reminder of the porous gaps between the
absent horrors of the massacre and the lack of response from the French
state, drawing our attention back to the places where recognition for these
state crimes should be but aren’t.
Moreover, Brozgal’s insight into the culture of amnesia surrounding the way
that the 17th October massacre is physically absent from the materiality of
city space, provides an interesting comparative bridge to help us think about
the ways in which the murder of Patrice Lumumba has been recognised (or
disregarded) by the Belgian state.
This thesis will argue that a key step to understanding how memory plays
into a sense of national identity in a Belgian postcolonial context is
addressing the imbalances of ignoring these crimes (and choosing, instead to
honour the legacy of Leopold II in statues across the country including in
Parc de La Cinquanterie and Place du Trone). I follow on from Sarah Arens
who suggests, ‘nation-building’ has to be understood in a very literal sense in
the case of Brussels, as the city has always been connected with

30

Lia Brozgal, ‘In the Absence of the Archive (Paris, October 17, 1961)’, South Central
Review, 31 (2014), pp. 34–54 (p. 35).
31
Brozgal, p. 36.

29



contemporary ideas of modernity and construction, and it continues to be
characterised by rapid urban expansion that has been historically tied to its
colonial projects in the present-day DRC.32 She writes:
From the glass and steel constructions of the European Quarter, to
the Atomium monument for the 1958 World Exhibition, and the
profits gained from rubber extraction and ivory exportation enabled
major construction projects not only in Brussels but also in other
Belgian cities such as Antwerp.33
The result of the rapid expansion and sustained urban development projects
under Leopold II, as Arens rightly points out, led to approximately ten million
Congolese deaths at the hands of a ‘brutal forced-labour system and
subsequent disease’.34
The atrocities committed by the Belgian colonisers in the Congo Free State
have again been brought to the attention of an international audience by
Adam Hochschild’s best-selling text King Leopold’s Ghost, exposing the
brutal extent of his violence towards Congolese people in the DRC and
beyond.35 The shadow of these legacies was brought back into public

32

The 2019 dossier de presse available on the municipality of Brussels’ homepage states
that the 2019 budget for ongoing urban development projects is €10.649.424,55, which
represents a 4.6% increase from 2018 budget (€10.179.000,00). See: ‘Annexe reprenant le
detail par article: budget extraordinaire’, 2019,
https://www.brussels.be/sites/default/files/bxl/PDF_DETAIL_EXTRA_2019.pdf (accessed 26
November 2019).
33
Sarah Arens, ‘Imagining Brussels: Diasporic Writing and the Transnational Urban Space’,
unpublished paper delivered at the conference Postgraduate Workshop, UCLA, (Los
Angeles, 24 February 2018).
34
Following severe international criticism, Leopold’s private property was turned into a
formal colony in 1908 and renamed the ‘Belgian Congo’ until its formal independence in
1960. See: Lieve Spaas, ‘Leopold II’, in A Historical Companion to Postcolonial Literatures –
Continental Europe and its Empires, ed. by Prem Poddar, Rajeev S. Patke and Lars Jensen
(Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2011), pp. 35–36 (p. 36); and Robert R. Ansiaux,
‘Early Belgian Colonial Efforts: The Long and Fateful Shadow of Leopold I’ (unpublished
doctoral thesis, University of Texas at Arlington, 2006), pp. 3–4.
35
Adam Hochschild, King Leopold’s Ghost: A Story of Greed, Terror and Heroism in Colonial
Africa (New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1998).

30



awareness through the viral 2015 hashtag #LeopoldMustFall documenting
the protest events surrounding the 150th anniversary of the enthronement of
Leopold II in Brussels. The need to fully come to terms with the extent of the
former Belgian King’s crimes has been highlighted by the recent dethroning
of statues across Belgium as part of the global Black Lives Matter protests.
This is a clear indicator that the need to make public space more inclusive
and reflective of the individuals who inhabit it will be an urgent prerogative in
coming months and years.
It is important to add, however, that a public coming-to-terms with colonial
history and its present-day impact on public space is not only informed by
street names and the choice of historical figures memorialised in stone or
lauded on plinths. We are also required to take a look at individual curatorial
cultures that have historically shaped how colonialism is represented, and
how curatorial choices (or an absence of them) have shaped how people
engage with colonial artefacts and legacies in Paris and Brussels
respectively. When viewed together, I suggest that my chosen case studies
can help us to understand how Chamoiseau’s vision of traces mémoires, as
well as Colin Davis’s notion of ‘conversing with spectres’ can play out in two
distinct European capitals with shared threads of recent geopolitical history.
36

Doing so, as my case studies will go on to demonstrate, reveals not simply

the difficulty inherent to challenging the cultures of state-backed forgetting,
but crucially the innovative and creative ways that forgotten legacies can be
worked back into city space by grassroots activists and artists from both
36

See: Silverman p. 225; and Davis, p. 38.

31



Paris and Brussels. These examples of innovation and profound respect for
forgotten memories and legacies will, I hope, offer up a series of wider
lessons about postcolonial memory in the present day that they can offer
researchers (and actors) within the field of Francophone postcolonial studies
moving forward.
III.

Summary of Case Studies

What lessons, then, can be drawn from looking at the francophone
postcolonial world, and how do they apply to broader questions about how
we remember violent historical legacies, and set about bringing previously
disavowed perspectives into the public sphere? Whilst still inherently tied to
the particularities of French and Belgian colonial history, when viewed as an
ensemble, the below case studies reveal a tension between dynamic social
movements and fixed tangible landscapes, between memory traces of
disavowed legacies and the desire to transform this alternate version of
history into innovative creative practice. They allow us to gain an active
insight into how loss and postcolonial legacies are being worked through in
city spaces across both new and traditional media as well as artistic
interventions and political movements. They represent the beginnings of new
journeys through urban landscapes, demanding to be followed and attended
to.
In order to look at how memory traces operate (or are tended to) in Paris and
Brussels, I have deliberately chosen case studies that that directly engage
with questions of postcolonial haunting or disavowed historical legacies.
Each case study represents either a form of tangible space (be it a square or

32



a building) or a mindful way of traversing city space (such as a structured
walking tour or a self-guided exploration of a digital memory map). Some of
the examples are reliant on moving through locations in cities, while others
engage with groups that have been involved in creating new memorial and
cultural sites in overlooked spaces or in new locations. Indeed, by engaging
with the idea of movement as both a physical action that helps us to traverse
sites with ties to colonial violence, and as an activist tool or social process
that seeks recognition or to campaign for an acknowledgement of colonial
crimes, my case studies directly look at the different ways these forgotten
memories and legacies of injustice are felt in present-day postcolonial city
spaces, and the ways that they can inform ongoing conversations in
academic as well as activist and artistic spaces.
My initial research for this thesis drew me to the 17.10.61 web documentary
and site-specific street art project in Paris, which became my first case study.
Curated by the anonymous street art collective Raspouteam, the project was
launched to coincide with the 50th anniversary of the 1961 massacre of
Algerian protestors by police. In the days leading up to the 50th anniversary,
the group hosted a series of projections at key points in the city with historical
ties to the massacre. The web documentary, accessible by a series of tiled
QR codes placed strategically across Paris, weaves fictionalised accounts of
the massacre (that are read and performed by actors) back into the
landmarks where the violence was originally committed or witnessed.37 By

37

The web documentary can be accessed at Raspouteam, ‘17.10.61’, https://raspou.team/
(accessed 2 August 2022).

33



drawing on a mixture of archival footage and present-day reconstructions and
recovered archives, the project seeks to shed light on its glaring absence
from national memory narratives. Passers-by and walkers are invited to
become actively immersed in (and familiar with) the events of the massacre.
My work on social justice movements in a Parisian context brought me to the
Collectif Mémoire Coloniale in Brussels, which is the second case study to be
addressed in this thesis. The CMC has positioned itself as an active player in
the move to transform engagements with, and understanding of, Brussels’
public space by hosting a wide range of talks, workshops and debates, as
well as quartier-specific walking tours that form the basis of much of my
analysis in Chapter 2. The group is a consciously intersectional, Pan-African
association, and regularly hosts events and talks around the theme of PanAfricanism.38 The Collectif’s current intervention draws on the work of several
longer-standing grassroots groups and charities active in Brussels, Wallonie
and Flandres more broadly. These include Binabi (Étudiants afrodescendants de l’ULB) and Cec de Louvain-la-Neuve (Étudiants congolais de
l’UCL).
Through my work with the Collectif Mémoire Coloniale (CMC) I was exposed
to — and developed a keen interest in — the ongoing campaign for a Place
Patrice Lumumba, which was eventually inaugurated in June 2018 during the

38

The group’s understanding of Pan-Africanism is built on Rita Kiki Edozie’s definition of
Pan-Africanism in ‘The Sixth Zone: The African Diaspora and the African Union's Global Era
Pan Africanism’, Journal of African American Studies, 16 (2012), 268–99 (p. 268). She writes
that: ‘Pan Africanism is defined as a movement which regards Africa, Africans, and African
descendants in the African Diaspora as a single sociocultural unit. Pan Africanism seeks to
regenerate and unify Africa and promote a feeling of oneness among the people of the
African world’.

34



second year of my PhD research. On 5th January 2011, the CMC launched
its first march entitled ‘Pour l’inauguration d’une statue de Patrice Lumumba
en Belgique’ to commemorate the 50th anniversary of Patrice Lumumba’s
assassination. In September 2013, the Motion for a ‘Place Patrice Lumumba’
was unanimously dismissed by the Conseil Communal d’Ixelles. On the 17th
of April 2018, Brussels bourgmestre Philippe Close took to public radio La
Première (RTBF) to announce that: ‘Ce 30 juin 2018, Bruxelles aura, pour la
première fois, une place Patrice-Lumumba’, which, he informed listeners,
would be located by the Porte de Namur metro stop, on the edge of Matonge
in the former Place de Baston.39 At the time of writing this introduction, the
square has been in public use for over two years with the official street
plaque (and a new commemorative statue of Lumumba) still residing in situ.40
My final case study is Kader Attia’s La Colonie, a former textiles factory at
128 rue Fayette in Paris’s 10th arrondissement near the Gare du Nord, which
has been turned into a creative multi-purpose space (with its own bar, gallery
and projection room).41 It hosts a year-round programme of events dedicated
to confronting France’s colonial legacies. The building sits on the edge of the
quartiers of Barbès and La Goutte d’Or (between the 18th and 19th
arrondissements) in the northeast of Paris. It has been hosting events since

39

La Première, RBTF, https://www.rtbf.be/radio/liveradio/lapremiere (accessed 17 April
2018).
40
As of June 2022, both the square and the information panels were still in place, but the
statue of Lumumba has since been removed.
41
It is important to note that in July 2021 — 6 months after the original submission of this
thesis — La Colonie was forced to give up its lease on rue La Fayette and begin a process
of crowd funding for a new venue. It has continued to host online events and screenings and
posts regular updates on its new Facebook page. See:
https://www.facebook.com/lacolonieaparis/ (accessed 1 June 2022).

35



its first inauguration in October 2016 to mark the 50th anniversary of the 17th
October massacre. The venue also holds a personal link to the event, as
Kader Attia’s parents were survivors of the massacre and are frequently
present at commemorative events (including the screening of Yasina Audi’s
‘Ici On Noie Les Algériens’ that I attended in the building in October 2018).
Whilst the differences between (and particularities of) these studies will form
the basis of my analysis in subsequent chapters, I shall argue that my crossdiscipline and cross-border focus can help bring us back to my original
question about what historical weight spaces can hold over us, and the
affective traces of grief — and long-forgotten legacies of loss — that can be
tapped into if only our understanding and perception of city space can be
expanded in the right way. Whilst Paris and Brussels are, in many ways,
shaped by distinct and very subjective postcolonial legacies, I suggest that
these case studies reveal how both can become a vantage point from which
to tap into the spectral traces of ghosts and unrecognised crimes, and to
provide us with new ways of imagining and understanding more universal
(and ongoing) questions about grief in city space. I also see it as a means to
be curious about the hidden traces of those who lives were lost in untimely
and unjust circumstances or at the hands of colonial powers, of bridging
different modes of analysis including from across the fields of memory
studies and postcolonial studies, as a means of moving closer to memory
traces and the long-hidden legacies they offer up.
Before moving on to explore the impact of these case studies in more detail,
however, it is first necessary to take a step back and pay closer attention to

36



how questions of memory — whether disavowed or nationally-established —
has been historically conceptualised within the field of Francophone
postcolonial studies, as well as the new readings of postcolonial space, and a
revised definition of walking, that I posit as a departure point for an
exploration of the artefacts I have chosen to focus on in this thesis.
IV.

Towards a New Theoretical Approach: Re-Framing Memory

In order for these new readings of postcolonial space — and alternate
readings of history devoid from the constraints of state amnesia — to
emerge, it is first necessary to interrogate how we understand memory in
relation to colonial history and how it might operate in the present. In
Multidirectional Memory: Remembering the Holocaust in the Age of
Decolonization, Michael Rothberg suggests that looking at memory’s
multidirectional quality can encourage us to think of the public sphere as a
malleable discursive space, where new understanding of both memory and
physical space can emerge. Doing so, he argues, allows us to understand
the public sphere as a space in which:
Groups do not simply articulate established positions but actually
come into being through their dialogical interactions with others;
both the subjects and spaces of the public are open to continual
reconstruction. 42
Rothberg’s thinking about memory underpins much of this thesis’ focus —
both within Francophone postcolonial studies but also as part of a dialogue
with artistic and activist movements — for a challenge and subversion of pre-

42

Michael Rothberg, Multidirectional Memory: Remembering the Holocaust in the Age of
Decolonization (Stanford CA: Stanford University Press, 2009), p.5.

37



conceived ideas about space. In order to integrate ‘traces mémoires’ and
‘conversation with spectres’ (to paraphrase Davis and Silverman, once again)
into the forefront of our understanding of postcolonial space and start to
redirect how we think about haunting and the way it can inform how we
challenge state led amnesia, we need to think about how those memories
might be composed, and might act, in the first place. In short, we need to be
mindful of what Rothberg very aptly describes as:
Memory’s anachronistic quality — it’s bringing together of now and
then from here and there — is actually the source of its powerful
creativity and its ability to build new worlds out of the materials of
older ones.43
Part of the challenge of integrating Rothberg’s vision of the ‘anachronistic’
quality of memory (and, indeed, in calling for a more engaged understanding
of what spectral haunting may look like postcolonial studies) requires
incorporating new perspectives and historically maligned legacies. As
Radstone notes, the increasing focus on the transnational and the
transcultural within the field of postcolonial studies implies that ‘memory is
not viewed as a cultural product but as a process with constantly evolving
nuances; in short, it conjures research projects focused on the locatedness of
engagements with memories on the move’44
Radstone’s thinking echoes much of Rothberg’s thinking that memory
‘refuses the ‘ownership’ of different pasts by different groups’.45 The key, he

43

Rothberg, p. 15.
Susanne Radstone, ‘What Place Is This? Transcultural Memory and the Locations of
Memory Studies’, Parallax, 17 (2011), 109–23 (p.110).
45
Rothberg, p. 45.
44

38



suggests, is instead ‘to draw attention to the dynamic transfers that take
place between diverse places and times during the act of remembrance’.46
Whilst this vision of memory does not (and, I argue, must not) diminish the
significance of individual legacies of violence, it confirms my own belief in
and ultimate call for a cross-border, multi-disciplinary engagement with
postcolonial memory: one, moreover, that prioritises innovative or spacefocused acts of commemoration.
By focusing on Rothberg’s vision of the dynamic transfer of memory (and its
shared quality) our attention is drawn directed towards an alternative reading
of history that is open to all the affective complexity of grief and loss, as well
as to a plethora of voices and perspectives. Being open to memory as
something that is multi-directional and anachronistic — one bound to
movement through space and free of any physical constraints — means that
the act of commemoration which emerges does not shy away from the
challenge of what Colin Davis describes as the process of ‘unknowing’ that is
so central to any process of conversing with spectre. By challenging both, our
factual understanding of pre-conceived events and the idea of historical truth
and perspective can look radically different if our mind allows it to, allows for
an engagement with haunting and haunted to perspectives that uncover new
engagements with the past. This process of unknowing, in turn, it is a form of
memory that allows for traces and alternate visions of history that deviate

46

Michael Rothberg, Deberati Sanyal and Maxim Silverman (special eds), Nœuds de
mémoire: Multidirectional Memory in Postwar French and Francophone Culture, Yale French
Studies, 118/119 (2010), p.11.

39



from state-backed narratives (or silences) to spill over into our understanding
of present-day space and of the way it can be navigated.
This understanding of memory traces existing outside the realms of statecontrolled narratives as a force to foster a unique — and inherently spatial —
connection with overlooked episodes in the past, echoes much of Patrizia
Violi’s understanding of the link between traumatic episodes in history and
specific sites. She writes:
Places maintain a real spatial contiguity with the trauma itself;
indeed, they are the very places where the traumatic events in
question have occurred, and the demonstration of such a continuity
is an essential part of their inherent and constructed meaning, not
to say the very reason for their existence. 47
She goes on to argue, crucially, that
since the traumatic events happened there, they directly expose
some precise material traces of them. In a way, what we have here
is a shift from representation to re-presentation, which is a
consequence of the unique indexical nature of these places and the
48
direct links they maintain with the actual trauma.
I argue that the creation of multi-directional memorial spaces outside of the
remit of state or national governing bodies (such as 17.10.61, La Colonie and
the Collectif Mémoire Coloniale tours) a ‘spatial continuity’ is created that
echoes much of Violi’s thinking about the ongoing ties between sites of
historical (traumatic) significance and memory in the present day. By
exposing the ongoing continuity between sites and traumatic episodes,
between the present day and the physical space in which an onlooker is

47

Patrizia Violi, ‘Trauma Site Museums and Politics of Memory: Tuol Sleng, Villa Grimaldi
and the Bologna Ustica Museum’, Theory, Culture and Society, 29.1 (2012), 36–75 (p.37).
48
Violi, p.38.

40



standing, my chosen case studies are able to foster a subjective relationship
to past events that supersedes the often-limited accounts of (and apologies
for) historical crimes offered up by the French and Belgian states. Doing so,
this allows for memory to ‘become democratically distributed, making it the
shareable property of all’.49
In consciously choosing to ‘break with the utilitarian order, habits and
protocols that characterize urban experience’, an openness to memorytraces with an inherently multi-directional quality can allow us to begin new
journeys into the postcolonial city.50 By (re)taking to its streets we are
learning to be attentive to the signs and symbols that may have previously
escaped our attention. We are invited to journey with ghosts in new (and
previously unchartered) directions, to re-connect with the traces of
overlooked colonial crimes and historical events and the new forms of
remembering that they offer us.
V.

Re-positioning Postcolonial Space

If we are to follow Rothberg and Silverman in thinking about memory as
something which not only changes the feel of space, as a process that can
create new connections between different types of spaces and locations,
then we need to look in closer detail at the particularities of the spaces this
thesis is rooted in. Specifically, I suggest, we need to first look at how

49

Andrew Hoskins, ‘The Mediatisation of Memory’, in Save As… Digital Memories, ed. by
Joanne Garde-Hansen, Andrew Hoskins and Anna Reading (London: Palgrave Macmillan
UK, 2009), pp 27-43 (p. 35).
50
Katherina Dodou, ‘Jim Sheridan’s ‘The Field’ and the Memory of Dispossessed Irishness’,
Nordic Irish Studies, 13.1 (2014), 111–28, (p.112).

41



postcolonial space has been theorised and represented within a
Francophone context, before going on to look at what new readings of space
should be considered as well as by what means.
In Postcolonial Hospitality: The Immigrant as Guest, Mireille Rosello outlines
her vision of spectral haunting in postcolonial cities, echoing Silverman’s
vision of memory traces that change the feel and perception of a place. She
invokes, with wonderfully rich precision, streets that are littered by traces of
‘hosts and guests’, subject to ‘rigidly assigned power differentials,’ but does
not stop to linger, at least for long, on the affective impact of their passage. 51
I find that her voice is echoed in Rastegar’s poignant descriptions of post-war
Beirut - a city I had temporarily hoped to include as one of my case studies in
thesis, until visa constraints made this all but impossible. Whilst Rastegar’s
vision of Beirut is naturally informed by shadow of the 1982 Lebanese civil
war, his vision of the city as a site of ‘ghosts that have not been mourned,
and spectres that have not been tried for their crimes’ spills into much of my
own understanding, and conception of, Paris and Brussels.52
In his description of Algiers in L'An V de la Révolution Algérienne, Fanon
describes the city with a similarly self-consciously visual eye as Rastegar
(albeit in relation to a different city) many years later. He writes that the city
is: ‘Un lieu malfamé… une ville accroupie, une ville à genoux, une ville

51

Mireille Rosello, Postcolonial Hospitality: The Immigrant as Guest (Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press, 2001), p. 56.
52
Kamran Rastegar, Surviving Images: Cinema, War and Cultural Memory in the Middle
East (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015), p. 34.

42



vautrée’.53 His deliberately visceral imagery itself feels haunted, conjuring the
traces of broken bodies and unavenged ghosts. Its qualities return like an
ever-lingering body: broken, submissive and kept on its knees. It is precisely
because the haunted city constitutes a site of encounters and of difference
that it has become what Yeoh refers to as the ‘visual symbol of
postcolonialism’: a motif to which researchers and thinkers return to, time and
again, when thinking about cities in the present day.54
However, in The Production of Space, Edward Soja calls on his readers to
consider ‘how space can be made to hide consequences from us, how
relations of power and discipline are inscribed into the apparently innocent
spatiality of social life’.55 That is to say, how ‘human geographies become
filled with politics and ideologies’.56 Soja’s emphasis on the human
dimensions of geography posits a challenge both to how we read the space
(and the layers of memory within it) but also the humans or individuals
themselves who are part of this new understanding of it. In order for the
conversations with spectres to be a dialogue that expands pre-established
understanding of the past, and for our vision of memory to be truly rooted in
Rothberg’s ‘anachronistic multi-directional memory’, then it is necessary to
examine Soja’s vision of the ‘human’ within human geography a little more
closely.57 By thinking about who gets to journey under which conditions, we
53

Frantz Fanon, L'An V de la Révolution Algérienne (Paris: Maspero, 1959), p. 22.
Brenda S.A. Yeoh, ‘Postcolonial Cities’, Progress in Human Geography, 25 (2001), 456468 (p. 468).
55
Edward W. Soja, Political Organization of Space (New York: Association of American
Geographers, 1971), p. 40.
56
Soja, Political Organization of Space, p. 38.
57
Rothberg, p. 15.
54

43



allow spaces of past injustices and forgotten ghosts to be re-framed and reimagined. By looking at the spatial politics of the cities we traverse (in this
case, Paris and Brussels) and the means by which we traverse them we can
allow new memories to re-surface, and new engagements with the city to
emerge.
VI.

Walking as Methodology

Central to the re-framing of the politics of movement and space in this thesis
is what I call active or attentive walking. I argue that this is central to creating
new journeys within the postcolonial city, and elevating previously overlooked
historical legacies as a result. If, as Soja argues, space is constituted by an
awareness of (or adherence to) dynamics of power, then our visual and
physical attention must be turned towards challenging the exertion of power
or ‘visual mastery’ of any one group over another.58 Part of this process
requires us to look at the politics of movement within spaces, as well as the
steps that are being taken to challenge who can walk through these spaces
and under what conditions.59 My interest here lies in the potential of walking
to be a conscious, premeditated act, or what I will refer to as attentive or
mindful walking. If we allow it, walking can seek to be deliberately attentive to
the material dimensions of physical space, and the layers of privilege and the
legacies of violence that we find within it. This emphasis on walking as a

58

Soja, Political Organisation of Space, p. 12.
Anna Louise Milne, 75 (Paris: Gallimard: 2016) which excavates the area’s history and
attempts at rehabilitating a small street near there. Whilst it is not directly relevant to the
questions of postcolonial haunting discussed in thesis, 75 provides an indispensable — at
times highly confronting — account of marginalised perspectives and stories that is able to
subvert the privilege of space in a similar way.

59

44



mode of analysis can, as Forsdick reminds us in ‘Journeying Now: New
Directions in Contemporary Travel Literature in French’, help inform our
engagements with questions of postcolonial memory.
Walking as movement is a mechanical, anatomical, and natural
activity; the choice of walking as a philosophical, political, spiritual,
or aesthetic experience shifts according to cultural and historical
context, and its meaning is invariably informed by that context 60
Whilst I am conscious of Forsdick’s apt assertion that ‘there is at times a risk
that the resulting account of the journey becomes nostalgic in an antimodernist sense,’ as he suggests ‘the rhythms of walking are linked to
processes of remembering and forgetting, of loss and recovery’ that tap into
a longstanding relationship in Francophone Postcolonial Studies of the
relationship between walking and unlocking memory, between movement
and new forms of historical discovery.
Walking through the city, understanding the presence of inferred meaning
and complex lived realities, becomes a means to re-orientate both how we
physically navigate urban space and the awareness we bring about the
historical events that happened there, and ‘the untold stories that might
reside in specific places and locations.’ 61 Through this process of reorientation, sites and landmarks can be questioned, dismantled, or reframed.

60

Charles Forsdick, ‘Journeying Now: New Directions in Contemporary Travel Literature in
French’, in Travel in Twentieth-Century French and Francophone Cultures: The Persistence
of Diversity (Oxford: Oxford Academic, 2005), pp. 156–96 (p.157).
61
Caroline Herbert, ‘Postcolonial Cities’, in The Cambridge Companion to the City in
Literature, ed. by Kevin R. McNamara (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014), p.
21.

45



In her vision of the postcolonial city, Herbert draws on the rhetoric of walking
to better understand the politics of postcolonial urban space. She positions
walking as a way to figuratively and literally ‘transgress prescribed
trajectories across urban landscape’.62 This destabilisation of the privilege of
movement exposes the gaps and absences that exists in what Murphey
described as the ‘formulation of landscapes’ and brings about a way to
physically engage with —and unpick — memory traces that emerge, as well
as new means of understand the perspectives of ghosts and guests that
linger so close to its surface. 63
De Certeau reinforces this idea that walking can be part of a process of
uncovering and creating new meaning within city space. As part of his
original conception of le marcheur, we are presented with a similarly
disruptive quality, further underlining the close link between walking and
power. De Certeau writes: ‘Le marcheur transforme en autre chose chaque
signifiant spatial…. il crée ainsi du discontinu.’64
This creation of something other, or the promise of new spatial possibilities
offered up through the act of walking, is significant to any engagement with
the postcolonial city. Yet it also seems to point away from the very
conception of city as text that De Certeau proposed: one when an urban
space is a ‘vital, evolving living product [that] preludes easy reading or

62

Herbert, p. 21.
Alexander B Murphey, ‘Landscapes for Whom? The Twentieth-Century Remaking of
Brussels’, Yale French Studies, 102 (2002), 190-206 (p. 190).
64
Michel De Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life (Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press, 2013), p. 12.
63

46



understanding’, in which walking into an embodied act.65 If space is
destabilised, or disarticulated, it is possible to become conscious of how it
holds different weight over different people, or restricts the movement of
those people at certain times. Doing so opens up new possibilities to
understand how we begin to address, and redress, the imbalances and
inequalities in space, both with regards to what legacies and lives are
commemorated in that space, but also in regard to what kinds of people are
free to move in that space with a tacit sense that their experiences and
perspectives are represented and tended to. As Forsdick reminds us in
‘Journeying Now: New Directions in Contemporary Travel Literature in
French’
Walking can, accordingly, be linked to a series of returns that
characterise late twentieth-century literature and culture: of experience,
of the body, of the subject, of travel, and — since walking is often allied
so closely to notions of narrative continuity — of the récit. In fact,
instead of being an element in a series, it is possible to present walking
as a nexus, as the activity in which these other returns are distilled in
66
order to coexist as a working system .
I follow Solnit’s suggestion that it is the process of walking which allows new,
or previously hidden, understandings of city space to emerge. Leading on
(brilliantly) from De Certeau, she argues:
Walkers are ‘practitioners of the city’, for the city is made to be
walked. A city is a language, a repository of possibilities, and
walking is the act of speaking that language, of selecting from those
possibilities. Just as language limits what can be said, architecture
limits where one can walk, but the walker invents other ways to

65
66

Shade Tours Homepage, https://shades-tours.com/en/home/, (accessed 1st June 2019)
Forsdick ‘Journeying Now’, p. 154.

47



go.67
Solnit’s sensitivity to the closeness between movement and language, and
how these conceptions spill over into how we understand space will continue
to inform much of my own thinking here. However, I would suggest that this a
more nuanced understanding of the differences between De Certeau’s vision
of the city as text and the utterances and encounters that can come from
engaging with hidden lived experience in space can be gained by challenging
traditional ideas of walking and its privilege, meaning, who gets to, or
chooses to, move in certain ways and under what conditions. This involves a
process of reflection within academic disciplines such as Francophone
Postcolonial Studies, or a consideration of the means by which walking can
be ‘a means of refiguring the compression of time and space, of opening up
spaces of resistance in which time, memory, and the body can be
reintroduced.’68
A key part of a process of re-examining the privilege attached to certain types
of walking, particularly from a Francophone Postcolonial Studies perspective,
must involve challenging the idea of the flâneur, that has historically occupied
a privileged position in cultural imagination, and on literature in our field.
Indeed, as Crickenberger argues, flânerie has become synonymous with a
certain form of unconstrained walking.69 She suggests that Walter Benjamin’s

67

Rebecca Solnit, Wanderlust: A History of Walking (London: Granta Books, 2014), p. 30.
Heather Marcelle Crickenberger, ‘The Flaneur – The Arcades Project Project or The
Rhetoric of Hypertext’, The Arcades Project Project 2002–2007,
https://arcadesprojectproject.blogspot.com/2018/03/the-arcades-project.html (accessed 30
January 2020).

68

48



introduction of Baudelaire’s flâneur into the academy, marking it out as a
‘central trope in the fields of both modernism and urbanism’ saw a significant
shift in ‘how the city was conceived in both cultural and critical terms’.70
This view is corroborated by Gleber’s reading of Walter Benjamin’s Arcades
Project. He writes:
In his seemingly purposeless approach to seeing and collecting
everything that he encounters in public space and culture, the flâneur
prefigures the principle and structures of Benjamin’s own seeing and
collecting, of his own efforts to record the signifying moments and
71
phenomena of capitalist modernity.
Crickenger seems to build on Gleber’s assertion, going on to argue that in
Baudelaire’s original account of the flâneur, he was often assumed to be an
observer that was detached from the immediate social surroundings as he
strolled through the city space. Understanding the flâneur as an actor who
aimlessly and without any explicit destination traverses the urban playground,
or by applying what de Souza, Silva and Sutko all refer to as a ‘wandering
and detracted gaze’, has long informed how the experience of navigating the
city space is depicted and written about.72 Solnit corroborates this sense of
removal from the realities of spatial politics, by arguing that The flâneur was
only ever a type, an ideal, a character in literature’.73
Whilst the flâneur might be a conjured presence or simply a fantasy, an idea
of how assigned masculine and privileged bodies can move through space,

70

Crickenberger, ‘The Flaneur’.
Anke Gleber, The Art of Taking a Walk: Flanerie, Literature, and Film in Weimar Culture.
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton UP, 1999), p.48.
72
Daniel M. Sutko and Adriana de Souza, ‘Location-Aware Mobile Media and Urban
Sociability’, New Media & Society, 13.5 (2011), 807–23, (p.809).
73
Solnit, Wanderlust, p. 59.
71

49



its presence in collective imaginings of city space reveals the extent to which
it has become a portmanteau of our assumptions about which bodies can
move where and under what conditions. Wilson has argued that
‘The flâneur’s freedom to wander at will through the city is essentially a
masculine freedom’.74 Indeed, I suggest that the extent to which flânerie is
tied to the question of whiteness, and the permeation of whiteness into visual
representations of city spaces, is indicative of how non-white bodies are
culturally curtailed by certain sets of assumptions about who has the freedom
to move through city space, and in what manner. Breaking away from the
trope of the flâneur and re-directing attention to the act of walking in the city
space becomes a way of challenging the pervasively white, masculine
shadow of flânerie in our discipline, and of providing alternative readings of
Lia Brozgal’s vision of ’illegible’ traces of violent legacies in city spaces.75
Moreover, by seeking out case studies that require us to move through space
in ways that reveal hidden and long-overlooked perspectives, I suggest that
we can re-centre engagements with both Paris and Brussels so that
scholarship is reflective of the sort of innovative cultural and activist
engagements with memory that have emerged in recent years. Similarly, by
bringing a scholarly focus to mindful movement through city spaces we can
actively consolidate an understanding of haunting as a process of dialogue,
and challenging pre-conceived ideas, be it about the impact that spaces can

74

Elizabeth Wilson, ‘The Invisible Flâneur’, in The Contradictions of Culture: Cities, Culture,
Women (London: Sage Publications, 2001), pp. 72–94 (p. 73).
75
Brozgal, p. 20.

50



have on an individual, the ways we move through them, and the kinds of
stories that are hidden within them, requiring our attention and care.
VII.

The Walking Tour Landscapes In Paris and Brussels

In order to better contextualise the case for mindful for or attentive walking
(that is conscious of its own privilege as well as the need to destabilise the
masculine freedoms of flânerie) I want to briefly pause to look at some
examples of pre-existing walking-centred initiatives in Paris and Brussels. In ,
I believe it is necessary to have a clearer understanding of what attempts are
being made to bring about alternative readings of history to light, and to what
extent pre-existing ‘Walking Tour’ formats in both Paris and Brussels
respectively are providing new models of resistance to state-backed silence
surrounding colonial history.76
At first glance, the walking tour landscape in both Paris and Brussels feel
reminiscent of many other major European and global capital cities. Walking
tours are readily available, with hop on and off bus tours, app-directed
walking tours and group trips listed on the Discover Brussels and Paris tourist
page. Culture Trip and Trip Advisor listing vast arrays of themed tours for
tourists trying to see different facets of the city on foot, as well as providing
online or virtual guides to key sites around the cities.77

76

Patrizia Violi, Landscapes of Memory: Trauma, Space, History (Bern: Peter Lang, 2017),
p. 61.
77
See Discover Brussels Homepage, https://www.discoverbrusselsguide.com/, (accessed 20
February 2023)

51



Both cities also have a number of specific tours aimed at exposing ‘hidden’ or
‘alternative’ facets to city life. In Brussels, Sandeman’s Alternative Brussels
City Tour seeks to actively move beyond the heavily-frequented tourist
attractions, and encourage new engagements with city space.78 On the
group’s home page they inform visitors that their tours uncover the:
Brussels you [don’t] see on postcards. Forget about chocolate, beer
and the European Union, and join us to discover a city where street
art represents the voice of the people, and where locals battle
against gentrification. We'll take you through the lively Marolles
area, into the LGBT district, and across one of the biggest
pedestrian zones in Europe to give you a taste of what makes
Brussels truly unique. Experience giant murals dedicated to comic
books, and street art remembering terror attacks, all while learning
about riots, EU demonstrations, and the reality of Belgium's recent
"NO" policy on cannabis.79
In a similar format to the Shade Tours hosted in cities such as Barcelona,
Beirut and Berlin, ARAU have been organising ‘Brussels seen by its
residents’ tours since 1997. These tours aim to boost the image of the city
and to help participants better understand its development, its riches and its
changes. The group offers over 20 guided tours, covering various themes, (in
French or English), including multiple tailored visits dedicated to art nouveau
and art deco history.
My interest in walking tours in the Belgian context, however, came through a
notable gap in tourist or artistic walking tours that engage with Belgium’s
colonial history. Whilst available historical tours in Brussels provided a

78

This week's Brussels Alternative City Tours, Sanderman’s Alternative Tour:
http://www.neweuropetours.eu/Brussels/en/sandemans-tours/tour-view/Brussels-AlternativeCity-Tour (accessed 28 January 2020).
79
Sandeman’s Walking Tours, https://www.neweuropetours.eu/ (accessed 3 March 2020).

52



detailed insight into life under occupation or the formation of the European
Union, there are no mainstream tours that allude to Belgian presence in the
Congo, Burundi and Rwanda (I go into the specificities of one ‘alternative’
walking tour in a subsequent chapter where I document my observations of
walking tour hosted by the Collectif Memoire Coloniale). Moreover, there are
no listed historical tours under the history or patrimoine culturel sections of
Trip Advisor or Culture Trip (either in English, Flemish or French) which
specifically engage with, or address, any element of Belgium’s postcolonial
past. Perhaps more worryingly, the Top 10 Brussels Attractions listed on both
Trip Advisor and Culture Trip mention Parc de la Cinquanterie which
continues to house a statue of Leopold II, despite mass calls for its removal,
and regular site-specific protests held by activist groups in the city, including
calls from the Grande Mosquée de Bruxelles located inside the park.80
Although in March 2017 a panel was added to a bust of Leopold II expressing
“regret” for the many victims of the Congo Free State (with a similar panel
added to a colonial monument in Geraardsbergen in early 2016), the violent
legacy of Belgian genocide is strikingly absent from any of the mainstream
walking tours, and does not feature in any of the descriptions of the park, or
the stature, listed on Visit Brussels, Brussels.info, Trip Advisor, Culture Trip,
Bruxelles Ma Belle or Culture Trip.81

80

‘Calls for Removal of Statues of Leopold II’, Flanders Today, 24 August 2017,
http://www.flanderstoday.eu/current-affairs/calls-removal-statues-leopold-ii (accessed 7
January 2020).
81
Culture Trip: Paris Walking Tours,
https://theculturetrip.com/europe/france/paris/articles/the-best-cultural-tours-in-paris-uniqueviews-of-the-city-of-lights/ (accessed: 3 February 2020).

53



It is interesting to note, however, that with the opening of the Africa Museum
in 2019, groups such as the Collectif Memoire Coloniale as well as
established forums like Culture Trip have begun to expand their remit to
include visits to the museum and specialised tours to view and learn about its
collections (the contents of which, and impact of, I address in greater detail in
later chapters).

Figure 1 Statue of Leopold II in Parc de La Cinquanterie, Source: Flanders
Today

In Paris the tourist walking tour landscape bears a lot of visible similarities to
its Belgian capital counterpart. Sites such as Culture Trip and Trip advisor list
a number of tours ghost tours of the catacombs and Père Lachaise cemetery
available for members of the public.82 The Local Paris Tour also hosts a
‘Walk On The Dark Side’ tour in Paris, taking visitors around the

82

Culture Trip: Paris Walking Tours.

54



Conciergerie, Pont Neuf, Le Louvre Museum and Tour Saint-Jacques as a
means to, according to the site, ‘dig up every last skeleton in Paris’ closet.’83
The tour’s homepage also makes direct reference to the Seine and how it
‘holds a fair share of Paris’s murky stories back in the days where death was
just part of everyday life.’84 Despite the somewhat striking parallels with the
Seine-dumping and the violence surrounding the massacre of Algerians by
the French police on the 17th October 1961, the tour does not make any
reference to the massacre, or to the wider instances of violence perpetrated
towards individuals from France’s former colonies in Paris. Outside of the
tours featured on tourist sites, initiatives such as Paris Noir / Black Paris
Walks founded by academic Kévi Donat have been profiled by publications
such as The Washington Post, and We Are Black And Travel Abroad,
demonstrating an urgent need to challenge established visions of French
history and what stories are told and elevated within Parisian urban space.85
Tickets are billed at €16,50 per person, leading visitors to under-explored
parts of the city on 2-3 hour long trips.

83

Walk On The Dark Side, Perfect Paris https://www.parisperfect.com/tour/walk-on-the-darkside-of-paris-tour (accessed 2 January 2020).
84
Paris City Vision Tours, https://www.pariscityvision.com/en/paris-dark-side-walking-tour>
(accessed 4 February 2020).
85
Le Paris Noir Walking Tours, Black Paris à la carte, https://www.leparisnoir.com/
(accessed 7 November 2022).

55



Figure 2 Kévi Donat hosting his Paris Noir tour outside the Pantheon, Photo
Credits: Paris Noir.fr

In a similar fashion to the Troubles Walking Tours in Belfast, Black Paris
Walks (or ‘Le Paris Noir’ attempts to displace touristic and public gaze
beyond central or popular areas of the city outwards to areas and stories who
have been overlooked. Indeed, Le Paris Noir focuses on what they describe
as ’three iconic working-class neighbourhoods’ that hold clues to the role of
evolution of immigration in the city.86 Donat also draws a parallel between
Pigalle and Montmartre, with neighbourhoods such as La Goutte d’Or, which
Donat labels as a ’fascinating example of contemporary diversity in Paris: a
case study of the emergence of an Afropean culture in France.87 Whilst Le
Paris Noir provides a necessary new slant on pre-existing historical walking

86
87

Le Paris Noir, http://www.blackpariswalks.com/en/about/ (accessed 19 March 2020).
Le Paris Noir

56



tours — and places legacies of colonalism firmly back in to the public sphere
to be traversed and engaged with — there are nonetheless some gaps in
scope that I would like to address here. Indeed, despite his exhaustive
mapping of black Paris — and references to migration from France’s former
Antillean colonies and DTOM — there is notably a lack of engagement of the
legacies of colonialism (and the spectres of the 17th October 1961 massacre
particularly).
Whilst the emergence of alternative walking tours in Brussels and Le Paris
Noir demonstrate a commercial appetite for the hidden ghosts and ‘skeletons’
in closets, I am once again reminded of Judith Butler’s invocation of
invisibility and vulnerability in social life or what she describe as ‘the limits of
what can appear and circumscribe the domain in which political speech
operates and certain kinds of subjects appear as viable or acceptable.’88 By
prioritising certain skeletons and spectres over others and by determining
which legacies get to be shaped by cultural artefacts and within the tourist
economy, we automatically deem certain lives to be more valuable or more
grievable than others. My decision to focus on virtual tours such as the
17.10.61 movement, the hidden walking tours of the Collectif Memoire
Colonial and the fixed locations such as La Place Patrice Lumumba and La
Colonie is a response to these porous gaps in touristic and cultural
landscapes. By choosing models that fall outside the scope of structured
walking tours and that shed light on historically overlooked episodes in
French and Belgian history, I hope to cast new light on modes of practices
88

Butler, Precarious Life, p. 23.

57



and different interpretations of overlooked urban spaces and heritage,
opening up new avenues of research in Francophone Postcolonial Studies
and beyond.89
VIII.

Methodology: Participant Recruitment, Methods and Research
Positionality

To ensure that my thesis was able to reflect the nuanced nature of the case
studies I examine — and be reflective of my own thinking about — the close
links between memory, space, grief and the spectral to look at the way that
postcolonial history is tended to (and commemorated) in Paris and Brussels.
In order to best do so, I felt it was important to not simply stay focused on
what I observed in both cities, but to also incorporate visual analysis of some
of the artefacts themselves and monitor online (and particularly the social
media) activity of these groups: some of which I mention briefly in later
chapters.
This vision of haunting as something that is once emotive, inherently spatial,
and tied to the different memories (and collective histories) of individuals in
Paris and Brussels cannot be easily captured with theoretical analysis alone.
Indeed, due to the cross-border and cross-disciplinary nature of my thesis, I
established a mixed-methods methodology - combining theoretical analysis

89

As stated previously, I will focus on specifically on the legacy of the 17th October 1961
massacre (and lack of acknowledgement by the state) in relation to Paris, and the failure by
the Belgian state to adequately account for the role played in its assassination of former
Congolese president Patrice Lumumba. However, due to the nature of the walking tours I
shadowed in Brussels in 2017 (which were organised by a predominantly Belgo-Congolese
activist group) some of my analysis touches on the erasure of the experience Congolese
second and third generation immigrants in Belgian society (as this was a common thread
that was discussed, and alluded to, in conversations that were carried out).

58



form the field of memory and postcolonial studies, with a mixture of first-hand
visual analysis of artefacts, first-hand ethnographic observations and semistructured interviews. I believed this would best reflect the nuances of my
case studies (which, respectively, draw on work in combination with artistic,
activist and community outreach spheres).
Due to the web-based nature of 17.10.61 (and both Le Collectif Memoire
Coloniale and La Colonie’s reliance on social media to promote their
activities) my methodology was shaped by an acute sensitivity to the
importance of digital media in helping to transmit new visions of postcolonial
haunting and shed light on new artistic and activist spaces and activities.
Similarly, as my research was also supplemented by digital content from the
interactive web map of 17.10.61 to promotional social media posts, I have
included references to the channels, posted copy and viral hashtags in
instances where I have judged that they were directly relevant either to the
inception or growth of my case studies.
My intention from the start of this thesis was that the majority of my analysis
would be rooted in first-hand observations and directly guided by the spoken
words of my participants, and it would not stray into in-depth digital
ethnographic analysis at this stage of the project’s research journey. To
ensure that my analysis was able to reflect as many different perspectives as
possible (and to allow me to draw on first-hand testimony throughout each of
my chapters), I used snowball sampling to recruit participants from activist
groups in Paris and Brussels. I did so building on the positionality outlined in
Ethnography and Modern Languages, which states that:

59



Ethnographic sensitivity encourages an openness to less
hierarchical and hegemonic forms of knowledge, particularly when
consciously seeking to invert the traditional colonial ethnographic
project and envision instead more participatory and collaborative
models of engagement.90
In order for my own research to be informed as many forms of knowledge as
possible, I drew on online research to identify relevant events and
conferences to attend that focused on the anniversary 17th October and the
campaign to secure a statue commemorating the assassination of Patrick
Lumumba, and attended conferences at Paris Nanterre, ENS de Paris and
Sciences-Po on topics relating to French colonial history and the politics of
urbanisation in Paris. Attending these events in person (as well as the
networking events) allowed me to identify individuals such as Kalvin Soiresse
that I wanted to speak to, which in term permitted me to carry out snowball
sampling at a later state to recruit further participants for my interviews.
Following a full ethics clearance from the University of Edinburgh — including
a specific clearance to work with vulnerable groups — I devised a framework
of questions that comprised a mixture of open and closed questions, which
were available for participants in both French and English.
Due to the nature of the interviews themselves and the focus on
commemoration, I believe the dual use of ethnographic observation and
semi-structured interviews allowed me to create space where participants
were free to bring their own subjective interpretations of what memory and
commemoration might look like. In Resurrecting Slavery, Crystal Fleming

90

Naomi Wells et al., ‘Ethnography and Modern Languages’, Modern Languages Open, 1
(2019), 1-16 (p. 1).

60



defines commemorators as ‘people involved in the production, management,
and institutionalization of collective memory’91, which posits commemoration
not just as external process but a subjective and individually guided act, a
definition that I actively applied when considering the individuals I wanted to
speak to as part of this project.
Fleming’s call to prioritise subjective interpretations of memory within an
appraisal of what collective or group memory might look like is echoed by
Alessandro Portelli’s chapter ‘The Peculiarities of Oral History’ in The Oral
History Reader. It makes a strong case for the need to centre the
testimonies, recollections and accounts of interview participants in research
both as means to strengthen analysis but to pay tribute (and accord
appropriate respect) to the individuals who have kindly given up their time.92
There is also, he suggests, an element of responsibility in making sure that
perspectives that have not been historically accounted for- that is to say,
written down or publicly displayed- are given the appropriate recourses and
recognition that they deserve.
When considering the role that oral testimony (and first-hand
accounts) should play in historical accounts of events, Portelli
argues that:
Memory is not a passive depository of facts, but rather an active
process of creation of meanings, that reveal narrators’ effort to
make sense of the past and to give a form to their lives.93

91

Crystal Fleming, Resurrecting Slavery: Racial Legacies and White Supremacy in France
(Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press, 2017), p. 35.
92
Alessandro Portelli, ‘The Peculiarities of Oral History’, in The Oral History Reader, ed. by
Robert Perks and Alistair Thomson, (New York: Taylor & Francis Group, 2015), pp. 96-107
(p. 96)
93
Portelli, p. 96.

61



In order to be able to tap into this active creation of meaning, as Portelli
argues, it is necessary to centre the accounts of those whose experiences
may otherwise have been erased — often violently — from existing historical
sources and narratives.
Oral sources [are] therefore a necessary (if not sufficient) condition
for a history of the non-hegemonic classes, while they are less
necessary for the history of the ruling class who have had control
over writing and therefore entrusted most of their collective memory
to written records.94
Both of these insights underpin my decision to lead with predominantly
participant-directed interviews. This allowed my participants to be active
agents in Portelli’s vision of memory creation and for my own thoughts about
memory and commemoration to be shaped — and led — by the insights that
were offered up in the process.
The testimonies of those who have kindly accepted to be interviewed for the
purposes of this thesis, who hail from a wide range of backgrounds and
professions, form the main focus of this thesis. I was conscious throughout
the research process of what Sarah Ahmed refers to as a ‘self-referential
engagement with the colonial past’95 I see the very decision to explore how
the memorial and physical fabric of city space is part of a wider process of
expanding how memorialisation and the voices and experiences that have
the right to be represented and valued in that city space are approached
within the fields of Francophone Postcolonial Studies and memory studies as

94

Portelli, p. 97.
Sara Ahmed, The Cultural Politics of Emotion (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press,
2004), p. 55.

95

62



a whole. My approach is one which, ultimately, seeks to counteract an
absence of testimony by drawing from a diverse range of connections
between different forms of representing loss.
However, in doing so there is an important need to balance a subjective
analysis of what it means to engage with haunting or memory traces, without
imposing a privileged or narrow-minded reading of space, or commemorative
practices.96 There is a need to be conscious of (and vigilant against) the
control that is afforded to those of us who have made the decision to
incorporate historical accounts (or analysis of history) into our academic
research and outputs. As Alessandro Portelli very aptly points out in an
analysis of how historians can use oral testimony:
The control of the historical discourse remains firmly in the hands of
the historian: it is the historian who selects the people who are to
speak; who asks the questions and thus contributes to the shaping
of the testimony; who gives the testimony its final published form (if
only in terms of montage and transcription97
The weight of the researcher responsibility that Portelli so aptly evokes has
preoccupied much of my thinking and lies at the heart of the methodological
decisions (including my choice to interview a mixture of academic, activists
and group leaders alongside my own field notes and ethnographic
observations and theoretical analysis, for example). I also believe that, in
many ways, it leads us back to much of Avery Gordon’s thinking about
haunting that I cited at the start of this introduction. Indeed, I argue that
seeking to bring to light forgotten colonial legacies is part of ‘re-fashioning

96
97

Ahmed, p. 35.
Portelli, p. 96.

63



social relationships in which you are located’.98 By centring the words of the
participants with direct ties to the events I have hoped to offset my own
positionality and self-preferentiality by giving over space to perspectives that
have historically been consigned to silence and allowing them to guide my
thinking at every stage of the research process. Yet focusing on the privilege
and politics of walking within Paris and Brussels demands an important
degree of scholarly and personal accountability. Part of this is my own
position as a white cisgendered researcher in an overwhelmingly white
discipline and field, where much of my own experience can be found
reflected in scholarly accounts and essays around me. There is an immense,
and undeniably unjust privilege in having been afforded the financial and
cultural ability to be in a position to write these words at a time when hostile
border policies are increasingly curtailing academic freedom and possibility
for so many. The imbalance of this position is not lost on me. Nonetheless, I
see this thesis as part of a move towards addressing our discipline’s
imbalance two ways. First, through its conscious decision to engage with
artists, activists and modes of study that bring marginalised voices and
spaces to the forefront of analysis. Second, through its opening up of a wider
conversation concerning the direction that Francophone Postcolonial Studies
(and the researchers within it) needs to take to better engage with the
nuance of commemorating postcolonial history in Paris and Brussels.

98

Avery Gordon, Ghostly Matters: Haunting and the Sociological Imagination (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 2008), p. 21.

64



To be mindful of these interlocking journeys, and the traces they leave in
space, I suggest that researchers are required to walk and read the visual
cues of the city attentively and with care. My vision of attentive walking
provides a new way of relating to the city, by ‘emphasising a conscious and
connected relationship’ to space.99 This approach is one, moreover, that is
open to alternate readings of history present in memory traces, that seeks to
challenge cultures of state-backed amnesia through the process of
unknowing or letting go of prior understandings that I posited as central to
any engagement with the spectral. 100 In order to expose the presence of
colonial thought and re-work the barbarous logic that characterises colonial
space, it is necessary to re-evaluate the way movement through the urban
space has been conventionally theorised.101
This thesis therefore also strongly advocates for the possibility that Social
Science and Humanities methods can, and should, be blended together in
order to allow for the most expansive dialogue with spectres and
acknowledgement of different forms of memory traces to emerge. Ellis
proposes that a way to approach ethical quandaries is to openly and
repeatedly re-examine and make ethical decisions within each situational
context, accepting that often there is no unambiguous solution. Ethical
dilemmas necessarily are present, and ethical researchers take responsibility

99

Gordon, p. 21.
Debra Linesch, ‘Art Therapy Research: Learning from Experience’, Art Therapy, 12.4
(1995), 261–65 (p. 264).
101
Ghada Adel Masri, Wounds in the City, Scars in the Nation: Making Sense of Identity,
Modernity, and Reconstructed Urban Space in Post-Civil War Beirut (unpublished doctoral
thesis., University of California, Davis, 2007), p. 10.
100

65



for their choices to provide ‘a complex portrayal and interpretation of the
communities we study, including our place in them.’ She writes:
These decisions are complex in terms of integrating our own moral
positions with society’s call for scholarship that contributes to social
justice; readers’ demands for truthful and multifaceted accounts;
and research participants’ and characters’ desire for privacy,
positive representation, and control over the stories of their lives.102
I believe that my use of semi-structured interviews and cross disciplinary
methodology provides the best vantage point from which to approach
questions of disavowed memory, haunting and postcolonial city space. By
choosing to focus on two former colonial capitals with distinct histories that
are united by the same language and recent waves of global terrorism, my
thesis natural positions itself at a point where I can start to unpick the
complex points of comparison and divergence between very different cases
of state-backed amnesia and grassroots lead remembering. Moreover, by
making the decision to highlight case studies that span different disciplines
(in this case art and activism), it is possible to see if there are any universal
or transferable lessons about how to draw out links between former sites of
colonial rule and present-day locations in Paris and Brussels. Finally, by
focusing on locations or projects that have important significance for presentday communities with ties to either the 17th October 1961 massacre or
Patrice Lumumba, my research has remained literally and figuratively
grounded in the perspectives I wish to elevate, both advocating for (and
seeking to shed new light on) Max Silverman’s vision of memory ‘a complex

102

Carolyn Ellis, ‘Telling Tales on Neighbors: Ethics in Two Voices’, International Review of
Qualitative Research, 2 (2009), pp. 3–27 (p. 3).

66



network of echoes and reverberations across space’ demanding new
readings, and new modes of understanding.
IX.

Summary of Chapters

When viewed together, the central question that underpins my case studies
across Paris and Brussels is how are dialogues with disavowed legacies and
readings of history embodied in each respective city? What are the lessons
that we can learn from 17.10.61, the Collectif Memoire Coloniale, Place
Patrice Lumumba and La Colonie about the sort of memory traces that are
present in two different former colonial capitals and what alternate readings
of history, and forgotten legacies of colonial violence, emerge across different
the different cities and different spheres (such as art, activism or established
museum collections)? By comparing these different examples over the
course of the next four chapters my aim is to establish whether there any
points of consensus or comparison that we can draw out in terms of how
each city is engaging (or failing to engage) with its own colonial history, and
what examples or types of memorial work allow for a nuanced and
emotionally sensitive re-connection with forgotten stories and memory traces
to emerge. Each of the following chapters will consider these questions by
examining each case study in further detail.
Chapter One, ‘Learning to walk with ghosts: Spectro-Digital Geographies with
17.10.61’, follows the street-art collective Raspouteam’s interactive web
documentary 17.10.61. It asks how the creation of ‘digital spectrogeographies’ through the web documentary and site-specific installations
across Paris can allow for new engagements with the memories of the 17th

67



October 1961 massacre to emerge. This chapter will argue that the stories
and voices offered up by the project give a uniquely ‘human face’ to the
ghosts of that night, and act as a guide to follow memory traces across the
city. Through an examination of key points along the project’s digital map,
and in person work (including projections of archive footage and graffiti on
the Pont St Germain and Pont St Michel), I will explore the lessons it can
offer up for future memorial responses to the 17th October massacre.
Through its spatial dispersion of Derrida’s vision of a ‘nouveau politique de
memoire’ through its web of QR codes and online digital memory map, this
chapter will examine the extent to which 17.10.61 can act as a creative
response to the need to live fairly and better with our own, and our inherited,
ghosts.103
Chapter Two, ‘Examining Paris’s ‘haunting economy’ through Kader Attia’s
La Colonie’, will analyse the commemoration of the 17th October massacre
in Kader Attia’s multi-purpose space, La Colonie, which has been operating
since 2017. Drawing a comparison with collections in the Musée National de
l’histoire de l’Immigration (where Attia’s work is also exhibited), this chapter
will expose the complex relationship between creative commemorative
practices and what Anne Clerval and Antoine Fleury have dubbed the
‘embourgeoisement de Paris’104. This chapter will also address the
progressive gentrification of the quartiers of La Goutte d’Or and La Chappelle

103

Derrida, p. 12.
Anne Clerval and Antoine Fleury, ‘Urban Policy and Gentrification. A Critical Analysis
Using the Case of Paris’, in Emergent Phenomena in Housing Markets. Gentrification,
Housing Search, Polarization, ed. by Lidia Diappi (Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer Link, 2012),
pp. 151–71 (p. 156).

104

68



that surround the building, exploring how engaging with colonial ghosts
demands a return to, and an engagement with, the present-day politics of
space. By attending to the socio-economic realities (and inequalities) at work
in La Colonie, I will seek to unpack how the memories of the 17th October
1961 have evolved since the 2011 appearance of the 17.10.61 webdoc, and
how they continue to be filtered by (or tied up with) forces of social and
spatial injustice in the city.
Chapter Three, ‘Moving Beyond Molenbeek: Tracing Belgium’s Transnational
Trajectories with the Collectif Mémoire Coloniale’ marks a transition from
Paris to Brussels. In this chapter I will explore how the grassroots activist
group ‘Collectif Mémoire Coloniale’ is shedding light on historically significant
landmarks and quartiers in a similar fashion to 17.10.61. This chapter will
draw on my own fieldwork notes and observations following the group on a
guided walking tour around the quartier Matonge. I will analyse the Collectif’s
use of structured walking tours as new forms of resistance to colonial
inequality, arguing that this is particularly significant due to the pervasive
presence of the Molenbeek district across social and national media
platforms in the light of the Brussels bombings (January and November
2015) and the Paris attacks (2015). My analysis of the Collectif’s specific
forms of ‘social remembering’ will lead me to engage with its long-standing
campaigning efforts to secure greater social justice in the city, aiming to
highlight the significance of individual sites, streets, statues and squares in
securing recognition for broader questions of racial and social justice.

69



Finally, Chapter Four, ‘Place Patrice Lumumba: Towards A New Politics of
Postcolonial Public Space’, will explore the Collectif’s longstanding efforts to
secure a square for Patrice Lumumba (which was inaugurated in June 2018).
Building on field notes, photos and ethnographic observations, I will examine
how memorial and cultural events leading up to and surrounding the square
inauguration sets in motion the possibilities for new forms of social
remembering. A year after the square was first opened to the public, I return
to the Square Bastion to ask whether the transition from a social movement
to a fixed city landmark has changed the way Lumumba’s ghost is felt and
tended to, both in the square and in the collections of the recently re-opened
Africa Museum. I will ask whether the square’s ability to mirror or ‘act as a
metaphor for trauma’ can help to transform the landscape of Belgian
postcolonial politics, and what the legacy of Patrice Lumumba in this square
and beyond can teach us about the future of memorialising colonial legacies
in present-day Belgium.
In this introduction, I have outlined my vision of what I understand both
haunting to look like in the context of the postcolonial city, whilst also
outlining how I believe that an engagement with memory and its traces (to
echo Chamoiseau and Silverman) in both Paris and Brussels can help frame
new engagements with both the 17th October 1961 massacre and the
spectre of Patrice Lumumba. As part of this process, I have positioned
walking both as a methodological practice and a means to develop
understanding of postcolonial theory in relation to city space. I have placed
particular emphasis in the latter part of this chapter on the need to revise

70



established theoretical understanding of memory and space, as well as the
ways in which I believe these should be adapted to best reflect the realities of
present-day Paris and Brussels. My subsequent chapters will touch on just
some of the ways that this attention can transform the act of walking, both
alone, or accompanied by virtual ghosts, or as an individual within organised
walking tour groups This thesis will outline some of the ways that these
creative interventions can ensure ‘existing political, economic and cultural
conditions, past and present, are no longer separated from meta-critical
speculations, or culture and discourse from histories that have happened’.105
By looking at the ways creative initiatives can enable us to move closer to
memory traces and undertones in city space, I envisage this thesis to be part
of a ‘challenge [to] the contemporary modes of societal organisation in
physical space’.106 In doing so, ultimately, I believe that we can move closer
to the stories and legacies demanding recourse to be heard, and to voices
still waiting to be heard.

105

Benita Parry, Postcolonial Studies: A Materialist Critique (London: Routledge, 2004), p.
12.
106
Idesbald Goddeeris, ‘Colonial Streets and Statues: Postcolonial Belgium in the Public
Space’, Postcolonial Studies, 18 (2015), 397-409. (p. 397).

71



Chapter 1: Spectro (digital) geographies: learning to walk with ghosts in
17.10.61

Ce qui suit s’avance comme un essai dans la nuit - dans l’inconnu
de ce qui doit rester à venir.
107

(Jacques Derrida)

I.

Spotlight On Spectral Paris: Introducing the 17.10.61 project

How do we learn to live with the ghosts of colonial crimes, or learn to speak
with them as Colin Davis implores us to do?108 Is coming to terms with the
un-mourned ghosts of historical injustices something we can learn to do
through creative practice, and can this affective engagement with ghosts and
the idea of haunting help bring us towards a more nuanced understanding of
inequalities at work in postcolonial cities? The answer (or answers) to these
questions haunts much of Derrida’s thinking in Spectres de Marx that I
referenced as part of my introduction. When outlining my methodology at
this, the start of this thesis, I put forward a vision of haunting as not
something that was centered on vengeful spirits or apparitions of ghostly
figures, but more as a process of being open to, and in dialogue with, hidden
legacies of historical injustices. It is with this understanding of haunting, and
the shared openness to challenging pre-conceived ideas about colonial
legacies and the way they spill over into our engagements with present day

107
108

72

Derrida, p. 230.
Davis, p. 373.



space, that I open my analysis of the 17.10.61 project by the street art
collective Raspouteam curated by the digital collective Raspouteam to mark
the 50th anniversary of the 17th October 1961 massacre of Algerian
protestors demonstrating the introduction of a curfew, who were massacred
at the hands of the French Police.
Across Spectres de Marx, haunting remains close to the surface of much of
Derrida’s thinking even when the presence of ghosts (or the ghostly) is not
explicitly articulated. The closeness to written thought and orality, to the
philosophical and the personal, makes itself felt in the hesitant quality of the
text and across the work as a whole. The question of what it means to live
halts and re-starts, its textual breaks reflecting the motions of spectres who
demand space and recognition again and again. ‘Il faut apprendre à vivre’
Derrida says, repeatedly. ‘À vivre autrement et mieux. Non pas mieux, plus
justement. Mais avec eux.’109
As part of my introduction, I discussed how Stephen Frosh explains that the
mysteries of our ghosts must be identified, appeased and laid to rest if we
are to fully understand their impact in the present day, and this is an idea that
I would like to develop in relation to spectral Paris and the 17th October
massacre in more broadly by way of a beginning. Frosh argues that central to
this process of identifying ghosts, or what I understand as Derrida’s process
of learning to live with ghosts, is an act of recognition, where a ghost grows in

109

73

Derrida, p. 13.



substance. This can be a loving process, in which something or someone lost
is recognised and mourned. Or, he argues,
It can be a deeply traumatic experience, in which something one
never knew one had comes back as a plague: a repetitive and
destructive inheritance that holds tight with its talons and can only
be released with violence and pain.110
Frosh elaborates on this point, explaining that this traumatic manifestation of
a ghost can be tied up to individual history (something we have done or has
been done to us) or it could be transgenerational, that is to say: ‘something
we did not directly encounter, but have always been aware was there.’111 He
goes on to suggest that the process of understanding individual and
collective trauma is itself always:
Telepathically, transferentially infected with these spectres and
ghosts such, it will always come back to face itself, tired perhaps,
full of something it can never fully lay to rest. 112
As part of my introduction, I suggested that ghosts can act as reminder of
injustices that have yet to be redressed, and as a legacy of suffering that has
yet to be acknowledged on an official or national level. In the context of the
17th October 1961 massacre, a moment in history that still remains largely
absent from France’s national memorial narrative, it is important to look at the
ways in which hybrid online and site-specific creative response to the
massacre becomes a way to tap in forgotten stories of the night and engage
more fully Chamoiseau’s vision of traces memoires113. As Lia Brozgal

110
111

Frosh, p. 35.

Frosh, p. 34.
Frosh, p. 14.
113
Silverman, p. 13.
112

74



reminds us in her analysis of the 17th October massacre: ‘The city bears only
the faintest traces of the event and its afterlives; few if any signs attest to the
nature of the repression or the lives lost.’ This lack of attention she suggests,
requires us to see the city as ‘scriptable, insofar as it impels, even requires,
the reader’s participation in its creation.’114 I suggest that Lia Brozgal’s vision
of a of a new active creation and transference (between present day
pedestrians traversing Paris and the memories of the 1961 massacre) lies at
the heart of the 17.10.61 project that places audiences as active participants
in creating a new script of the city. As such, 17.10.61 becomes part of an
unfolding dialogue with the memory traces scattered across the city through
the fictional characters of the night represented through the project, as well
as means of engaging with forgotten perspectives of that night that have
been lost due to inaction, and amnesia, on behalf of the state.
This chapter will therefore go on to examine the ways in which the 17.10.61
project offers up a creative means to re-connect with both an alternate
reading of the history of the 17th October 1961 and imagined hologram
ghosts of that. Through filling in Lia Brozgal’s vision of an absence of firstperson accounts and experiences, the project positions itself in direct
opposition to a 50-year culture of silence by its affective re-mapping of
memory traces across the city. Through the use of a site-based (and online)
interactive web documentary that takes the viewer through the experiences
of eight individuals who witnessed the events of that night, I will examine how
the use of sensory audio-visual media helps to give a uniquely ‘human face’
114

75

Brozgal, p. 35.



and how this process is able to subvert dominant lines of discourse
surrounding the events of that night, rendering alternative versions of what
happened on the night ‘scriptable’ and part of Rothberg’s vision of a ‘dynamic
transfer of memory.’115
This sense of transfer between different periods of history is also particularly
pertinent in the case of the 17.10.61 project, which was commissioned to
launch on the night of the 50th anniversary of the massacre in 2011. In the
weeks leading up to the 17th, the group placed a series of QR codes printed
on to tiles in some of the lesser-known locations with historical links to the
massacre, which included Pont de Neuilly, Pont de Clichy, Etoile, Grands
Boulevards, Palais de Sport, Montreuil and St Michel, where protestors either
gathered at the start of the demonstration against the couvre-feu, or were
taken as part of the police’s round up of Algerians present on the night. Each
QR code corresponded to a red dot on the black and grey interactive map,
where a user would be re-directed to a video and hear the (scripted and
performed) story of a character present at that location on the night of the
17th October 1961, with each testimony supplemented by a link to additional
archival resources and investigative work hosted on ina.fr. In an interview
with director David Dumfresne for Omni Magazine, anonymous
representatives from Raspouteam commented that:
Paris s’invente une histoire officielle bien propre sur elle. Pour nous
Paris c’est un lieu de luttes, de révolutions, de grandes

115

76

Rothberg, p. 17.



répressions… Un lieu qui a un sens politique. C’est cet héritage
qu’on cherche.116
In this chapter I will go on to examine how the spectral undercurrents present
in 17.10.61 (as well as the explorations of the crimes committed by the
French state) offer up new perspectives of the 17th October massacre. By
providing a physical and digital illustration of what uncovering memory trails
might look like, they give us a clear example of the form that overlooked
stories and legacies can take in public space. Doing so acts as both a
challenge to state-sanctioned silence surrounding the massacre and the
cover-up of the state-sanctioned killings by the French police, as well as
allowing a more nuanced and affective engagement with the stories of those
with first-hand experience of — or ties to — the massacre to emerge.
Furthermore, I will suggest that the stories and voices offered up by the
project give a uniquely ‘human face’ to the legacies of state-sanctioned
colonial violence, and the victims of a disavowed historical event.117 With
each QR code or point on the interactive map corresponding with the story of
a ghostly red and black hologram of a person present on the day of the
massacre, the viewer is instantly transported into an immersive, visual space
where colonial violence becomes literally humanised. Whilst the project has,
for the most part, ceased to physically exist, it remains present and
accessible online, and can be accessed directly via a user’s smartphone,
providing an important illustration as to how alternate readings of events can

116

David Dufresne, ‘La commune de Paris’, OWNI 19 March 2011,
http://owni.fr/2011/03/19/la-commune-deparis/index.html (accessed 12 November 2016).
117
Alan Rice, Creating Memorials, Building Identities: The Politics of Memory in the Black
Atlantic (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2012), p. 5.

77



be threaded back into city spaces. 17.10.61 gives us an insight into the ways
in which ghosts can be commemorated, or ‘grow in substance and certainty’
by the creation of virtual memory traces or what I refer to as spectrogeographies: allowing the past to be attended to and experienced in new
ways

118

. It is a reminder that when the physical erodes, or is lost, strands of

‘wearable, shareable digital memory that is the property of all’ can
reverberate through and under our journeys across the postcolonial city.
Something of this fluidity of memory is able to match up with the sensory
quality of absence so beautifully evoked by Arthur.119
This chapter will go on to outline the varied ways that the 17.10.61 project
allows previously disavowed memory, like absence, to be threaded invisibly
into stones and surfaces, displaying the ways that cannot always be seen,
but always acknowledged and always felt. By bridging the affective, the
political, the subjective and the spectral 17.10.61 provides a tangible
example of how memory traces of the massacre are still felt in the city as well
as illustrating the ways in which innovative artistic practice can be deployed
to encourage a connection with them. By creating digital and physical paths
around Paris 17.10.61 provides an embodiment of a creative response that
allows us to appreciate the scope of colonial legacies at work in city space,

118

Frosh, p. 14.
Paul Longley Arthur, ‘Saving Lives: Digital Biography and Life Writing’ in Save as…
Digital Memories, ed. by Joanne Garde-Hansen, Andrew Hoskins and Anna Reading
(London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010), 44-59 (p. 45).

119

78



whilst also learning to literally walk alongside the ghosts of the past that are
brought to life by the project.120
I will then go on to look at how the 17.10.61 project allows for an engagement
with Silverman’s vision of alternative readings of history and how
Raspouteam’s work becomes an extension of Frosh’s call to enter into a
dialogue with ghosts. Over the course of my analysis, I will examine how
Raspouteam’s 17.10.61 project is part of an affective re-mapping of memory
traces across Paris, before going on to examine how this leads to the
creation of what I call ‘spectro-geographies’, before moving on to assess the
possibilities for new forms of commemoration that the project offers up. This
chapter will also suggest that an awareness of the affective dimensions of
haunting allows for a figurative re-mapping of Parisian city space by teasing
out the nuances of the different types of haunting present within city space.
Part of this includes bringing the legacies of overlooked figures with the FLN
or the Algerian War Of Independence to light, whose faces and snippets of
stories are weaved into the streets they traversed or were killed in. By
shedding light on disavowed stories or hidden figures in space, 17.10.61
positions itself as a means of actively and affectively re-inscribing meaning
back into space, providing new avenues to consider what commemoration of
the 17th October massacre — and France’s colonial past more broadly —
can look like moving forward.

120

79

Frers, p. 16.



Figure 3 Still from the opening credits of the 17.10.61 web documentary
II.

17.10.61: New modes of haunting and affective re-mapping of
absence

Though it’s unique combination of site-specific and online memory traces
across the city, 17.10.61 provides us with a point of entry to think about how
absence and haunting spill over into the materiality of city space. Through its
engagement with memory traces and first-hand accounts of the massacre
offered up in the form fictionalised testimony, we are reminded how the
legacy of forgotten crimes can be part of Rothberg’s vision of a ‘“dynamic
transfer of memory’. The project thus becomes a means of re-connecting
with what happened on that night and challenging Brozgal’s astute overview
on France’s ongoing amnesia.
Part of recognising the dynamic transfer at work in 17.10.61, and the way
that it opens up a process of dialogue around (and with) memories of the
massacre, is to think about how absence is experienced both through the

80



project itself, and in the present-day places that lack any readable or
noticeable acknowledgements of the state’s crimes.
In his own conceptualisation of absence, Lars Frers aptly reminds us,
absence revolves ‘around spectres and imaginations, again and again.’121
Absence, of people and things, as a result ‘delve into the flesh, it shows the
hurt and the pain, the surprise, fear and wonder that enter the corporal field
when absences are experienced’.122
By engaging with the ghosts of people who once walked among us, who
have been taken in cruel, unjust circumstances, requires us to recognise the
corporeal complexity of absence. We become conscious of how it lives in our
flesh, or our memories and movements. Absence changes the way we relate
to space because of the impression it leaves on the skin and the limbs that
carry us through spaces. It runs through each step, with each deliberate
pressure of feet on the ground, and each loose swing of hands and arms.
Frers poignantly observes that: ‘different from a general not-being or notexisting, absence is a not-being-here, a not-existing-now’.123
The relational quality of being and not being is what returns in skin and flesh
‘again and again’. It becomes, as Solnit observes, ‘What you can possess,
what is immortal’.124 This sense of absence and a bodily connection to loss,
in turn, becomes part of the ‘tangible landscape of memory, the places that

121
122

Frers, p. 43.

Frers, p. 43.
Frers, p. 44.
124
Rebecca Solnit, A Field Guide to Getting Lost (New York: Viking, 2005), p. 36.
123

81



made you, and in some way, you too become them’.125 It is in this state of
possession by, in (and because of) loss that I will begin this first foray in a
postcolonial urban landscape. Loss is, as Solnit suggests, both ‘memory of
an absent richness’ and a set of clues by which to navigate the present. By
allowing us to be in a state of ‘être avec les spectres’ and loss (be it a loss of
people, places or things), 17.10.61 sets up the possibility of all that we stand
to gain clues to navigate our journeys in the present. As Cameron suggests,
‘ghosts have a politics’: a series of messages that need to be incorporated
into the ways that we move through the city.126 These undertones, in turn,
should be translated into the national memorial politics that impact who is
remembered where and what prominence this absence takes on a national
memorial agenda.
The presence of those who have been excluded, marginalised and expelled
(or, as Freud suggests, ghosts that have not been recognised as such)
‘points towards the materiality of colonised and abject bodies;.127 She rightly
argues that ghosts upset the assumed stability and integrity of western
temporalities and spatiality, and seem to embody the ‘mismatch between the
ideal and the real, the present and the absent’. Ghosts, as Derrida reminds
us, trouble any efforts to finish and close (‘à en finir’); it’s only by living with,

125

Solnit, A Field Guide to Getting Lost, p. 36.
Emile Cameron, ‘Cultural Geographies Essay: Indigenous Spectrality and the Politics of
Postcolonial Ghost Stories’, Cultural Geographies, 15 (2008), 383–93 (p. 384).
127
Cameron, p. 385.
126

82



talking with, and accommodating our ghosts that we might learn to live with
them anew.128
As I have outlined in my introduction, haunting need not be about forgetting,
avenging, or the lurking presence of literal ghosts. Instead, it can become
part of a richer understanding of time, place, and as such, as Cameron
argues, geographers might reconsider the political potential of haunting
tropes in their accounts of the colonial and postcolonial. This political
potential of spectres and ghosts closes the circle of my own line of thinking
and brings us back to a Derradian politics of memory and heritage. This
political potential of the spaces we walk through should also be considered in
the light of everything that stands to be gained, in the richness of Rebecca
Solnit’s vision of loss. I suggest that absences in landscapes can be felt
almost as acutely as the absence of people or things we have loved too.
They offer up hurt and pain, the surprise, fear and wonder that enter the
corporal field when absences are experienced are relayed to the individual
moving through space. In embracing the surprise, the fear and the wonder
we learn to enact ‘une politique de la mémoire, de l’héritage et des
générations’ to live with it freely, fairly and well.129
This stance feels all the more crucial in the context of Paris, and the layers of
memory and history operating under the surface of the city or, to paraphrase
the popular Hidden Paris Walking tour, that are hiding in plain sight. Indeed,

128
129

83

Cameron, p. 385.
Derrida, p. 13.



In Cosmopolitanism and the Geographies of Freedom, Harvey seems to
echo this stance, arguing that:
As an entity in relative space-time, Paris takes on the character of
permanence: an evolving receptacle open to the whirling currents of
global flows of goods and services, of people, commodities, money,
information, cultural values and capital. The inhabitants of the city
engage with these flows through “physical, material practices and
encounters” locations.130
He goes on to add, crucially I think, that: ‘The materiality of Paris can often
be experienced through the materiality of dominant processes and effect…
Paris can be lived as memory, generating sensations of intense pleasure or
pain’.131 Raspouteam’s ability to extend this materiality and to transpose it
both into physical landmarks and on to smart phone screens reinforces the
sense of history being an organically, evolving legacy rather than an ossified
or fixed set of memories. By engaging with the history of the 17th October
massacre through the web-documentary medium (and combining site
specific installations with accessible video material) the 17.10.61 becomes a
literal embodiment of the evolution of this historical legacy into a present-day
postcolonial reality, revealing the ways that the legacies of these crimes
continue to live on, be modified, and creatively re-worked in current climates
and as a result of contemporary socio-economic, cultural or emotive forces.
132

130

Chabal seems to echo this stance through his assertion that:

David Harvey, Cosmopolitanism and the Geographies of Freedom (New York: Columbia
University Press, 2009), p. 21.
131
Harvey, p. 22.
132
Harvey, p. 22.

84



Raspouteam’s work constitutes a creative response. It produces a
more nuanced answer to the problem of a contemporary society’s
collective responsibility.133
The nuance of both the project’s cross-disciplinary format and the multitude
of voices that are elevated within it, becomes a means of humanising
legacies of colonial history and re-stressing their significance for (and impact
on) present-day communities who inhabit the city space. 17.10.61 thus
becomes a means of directing or focus beyond the worlds of its imagined
characters the areas present-day communities and descendants of the
massacre inhabit, and the sanctified spaces in which the massacre took
place where perpetrators of violence continue to be immortalised in statues
and protected by an absence of a visible or visual state-sanctioned apology
for the events of the night of the 17th October 1961. By leading us on a
digital or physical journey between significant sites, guided by the stories and
perspectives of the individuals with a living connection to the events of that
night, Raspouteam’s interactive web documentary becomes a starting point
to righting that balance: addressing absences or gaps in the places where
the state still refuses to fill or acknowledge.
The emphasis on the projection of past archive footage onto present
locations ensures that this is visually embedded into the video testimonies of
the survivors throughout the 17.10.61 project. Projected images of protestors
processing across the Pont St. Michel or pressed up against the walls of
Concorde Métro station create a sense of immersion in lived experiences and

133

Emile Chabal, France since the 1970s: History, Politics and Memory in an Age of
Uncertainty (London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2015), p. 27.

85



moving bodies. Even if the spectators themselves remains static or still whilst
watching the images, the connection to the active experiences of bodies that
passed through this space whose absence is not accounted for or marked,
creates a different kind of viewing experience. This in turn echoes Frers’
evocation of the affective quality of absence and its propensity to impact the
material experience of passers-by that go through space.
I follow Chabal by suggesting that this shift from subjective observer to active
participant that is facilitated by the site-specific component of the 17.10.61 is
a timely reminded of the new models of engaging with colonial legacies in
city space. I suggest that these sort of creative responses must be prioritised
by practitioners and given visibility by actors within the field of Modern
Languages looking to approach legacies of colonial violence in city space
from a completely new angle. The spectator is placed simultaneously as
consumer of artistic production and moving image, as well as active,
historical detective. They are free to move from landmark to landmark and
can learn ways to be with ghosts in ways that are better, and fairer. They
become party to a digitally immersive, subjective engagement with history,
whose traces resonate in movements, gestures, in the materiality of minds
and flesh as we move through space. By opening up this immersive
engagement with the legacies and testimonies taken directly from interviews
with survivors of the massacre through this affective re-mapping of absence,
17.10.61 acts as a means to redress the absence of scriptable clues of the
event by creating new routes through the city that seek to tap directly into the

86



stories and accounts of those whose voices were never given the opportunity
to be heard.
III.

Guerrilla Memorialisation: Giving A Human Face To History

This emphasis on a sensory re-mapping of Parisian space draws us closer to
the subjective memories of that night, opening up the possibility to attribute
what Alan Rice describes as a ‘human face’ of history. This significance of
providing a personal ‘human’ face to the night of the massacre serves as a
further reminder of the totalising grip of state silence that has rendered the
city illegible for those looking for traces of what might have happened.134 By
creating a tangible bridge between the silence of national memory narratives
and the personal testimonies of those present on the night of the massacre,
the 17.10.61 project is able to tap into affective experiences of the night and
centre personal testimony in doing so. The prevalence of three-dimensional
faces of characters such as Yacine, Leila and Omar at the top of the
homepage and on the side of the videos on the page sets up a dialogue
between different forms of history, and by extension different voices of
history. By emphasising the particularity of the human voice and face (in
giving the events of that night such a uniquely subjective slant) history is
offered up in a way that encompasses the affective, the factual and the
political.

134

See Jean-Luc Einaudi’s references to the difficulties accessing archival material outlined
in Octobre 1961: Un massacre a Paris, where he outlines how some documents and
archives have been destroyed, while others remain classified.

87



The merging together of archive imagery and present-day footage only
serves to further underline the vividness of the images, of their inability to be
confined fully to the realm of the archival, the historical or the filmed. We see
a clear example of this in the case of Mohammed, where images of
dissolving faces of victims are repeatedly projected in a slow, looping fashion
on to the doors and windows of a house, as Mohammed recounts how the
protestors marched from the bidonvilles on the outskirts of the city into the
centre. The fast pace of his prose seems to jar with the languid quality of the
images. The ‘uncanny’, haunting quality of the footage moves beyond the
realm of the visual or digital merely psychic into cultural and geographical
contexts, ‘where dispossession-repossession, locational perceptions and
epistemology inform the uncanny’.135

Figure 4 Still taken from the 17.10.61, Mohammed,
<https://raspou.team/1961/>

135

88

Frosh, pp. 15–16.



In aligning itself with this vision of an immersive, sensory approach to
commemoration, 17.10.61 thus serves as an effective means of bringing
legacies of the night to the surface and a way of physically re-directing —
and encouraging — new routes around the city. It is a means of generating
an active, engaged, and above all subjective relationship to the
undercurrents of the haunted Parisian landscape. A passer-by is free to draw
on a body of work from his or her smartphone, to google the project and
dedicate time to meticulously looking through the artefacts available,
plunging themselves into a digital immersion. Whether they choose to walk
between QR codes across the city, or simply use the mobile version of the
site on their phones, spectators are offered the possibility to trace a route, or
conduct an ordered trajectory in between echoes of traumatic memory
allowing new visions, insights and relationships to the streets of Paris to
emerge. The project as such is able to create a line, or rather a series of lines
(physical, virtual, figurative) that allow for new ways of seeing, and conscious
ways of walking, to emerge.
The human faces held in digital vessels of smart phones serve as a reminder
of how technological advances in material culture can invoke ‘social
transformation precisely because of the ways in which it is interconnected
with other areas of life’.136 This connection between the digital and the
spectral reminds us that haunting in a postcolonial context need not be about
forgetting, avenging, and lurking but rather about gaining richer
understandings of time, place, and materiality as I outlined at the start of this
136

89

Andrew Hoskins, ‘The Mediatisation of Memory’, p. 34.



chapter. 17.10.61’s transformative possibility resists any of the project’s
material degeneration in the present, suspended in the digital undercurrents
of the city and in the gaps on buildings and corners where some QR codes
remain. The richness of affective and shared material and digital memory
maps in a certain respect help to safeguard the project from erasure, or at
least makes its physical erasure from walls and street corners feel less
significant somehow. 17.10.61’s power is that of the human face, of the
impression of faces and voices that are given recourse to resonate in
physical space. This person was here, in this spot, in this date. If absence
can be felt in our flesh, or gestures and movements, then how (as Maddern
and Adey remind us) can we ‘just walk over the footsteps and not
remember?’137
In giving absent history the right to take up presence in the present public
space, 17.10.61 changes the memorial and material relationships that can be
traversed in our journeys across Paris. Its resistance to the homogenising
drive of state control, of what and who can be remembered in what place and
under what circumstances, is significant. It is a further reminder of the
uncontainable nature of absence and absent people, of absence’s tendency
to shift voices and recollections back into the present ‘again and again’.
17.10.61 becomes an example of what Alan Rice dubs ‘guerrilla
memorialisation’.138 Rice’s guerrilla memorials expose the tensions between
architectural design, ideological power and national agendas by necessitating
137

Frances Maddern and Peter Adey, ‘Spectro-Geographies’, Cultural Geographies, 15
(2008), 291-295 (p. 291).
138
Rice, p. 22.

90



‘a complete rewriting of the imperial cityscape’ in ways that are ‘multivalent
and multifarious.’139 He writes that:
Dialogising history with other forms, such as biography, folklore,
memorials and artistic representation, helps to fill that contested
and empirically dry history with the memories and experiences it
needs in order to reflect a more accurate and human face.140
This guerrilla movement against state-sanctioned effacement of the 17th
October massacre is re-enforced repeatedly through the project, and in the
shots of the group’s site-specific interventions in Paris. We see this notably
through the character of Lucien who witnessed the widely photographed
tagging of ‘Ici on noie les Algériens’ on the side of the quais between Pont St
Germain and Pont St Michel, halfway through his account. The camera cuts
to a shadowy indistinct member of the collective painting the words on the
side of the bridge in the present (the tag was part of just one of the guerrilla
actions staged by the group surrounding the 50th anniversary of the
massacre in 2011).
The dissolving of present-day ‘guerrilla memorialisation’ into still archive
photographs both mirrors and resists the sense of an effacement of history
through dominant state discourse.141 The camera lingers for a split second on
the freshly applied paint, re-enforcing the present-day immediacy of the
graffitied words before fading and transitioning into a jump cut where the
screen is re-imposed with still black and white photographs. The smooth
tempo of the edits and the blurring between past and present images literally

139

Rice. p. 23.
Rice, p. 22.
141
Rice, p. 12.
140

91



mirrors the back-and-forth motion of sweeping or balayage. Conversely, the
co-dependency of past and present images (which are, at instances, virtually
indistinguishable) acts as a buffer to the effacement of history. It reminds the
spectator of the ripples or undercurrents that act as a permeable bridge
between past and present, and of the liquid quality of the memories that keep
different spheres of recent history in a state of continued dialogue, and
ongoing dependence.
This sentiment is extended through the testimony of Clémence, and FLN
‘Porteuse de Valise’ describing a journey to Concorde Metro on the night of
the massacre, and witnessing ‘des dizaines d’Algériens plaqués contre le
mur’. As Clémence recounts her experience of exiting the station, presentday brightly light shots of the walls of present-day metro carriages are quickly
intercepted with archival photo of Algerians being pushed up against the tiled
walls of metro stations, their hands placed on their heads. The photo remains
fixed in the centre of the frame in sharp contrast to the previously accelerated
oscillation between past and present scenes, before gradually being usurped
by blurred lights that sharpen in focus to reveal puddle-covered pavements in
the present day, once again grounding the threads of memory and
recollections back into material surfaces of present-day Paris.
IV.

Spectro-Digital Geographies

By giving such a detailed and emotionally compelling human face to the
memories of the 17th October massacre that have been so long consigned to
silence, the 17.10.61 project positions itself in direct opposition to national
memory narratives surrounding what happened on the night. Moreover, the

92



convergence of old and new media at the heart of the web-documentary
becomes an important point to consider the innovative ways that legacies of
loss and absence can be worked back into city space and offer up different
versions of history in the process. In the case of 17.10.61, the mixture of
online and site-specific dispersal of memory creates a doubly compelling
sense of participation, opening up virtual and physical routes for users to rediscover Paris anew. The stories which emerge from the project feel all the
more poignant due to the absence of any concrete memorials in the city
space, and the active effacement or clearance of history from the geo-cultural
memory of France as a whole, I argue that the project is part of the creation
of what I have referred to a Spectro-Geographies. Building on from Derrida’s
vision of spectro-geographies outlined in Spectres du Marx, Dixon suggests
that ghostly geographies ‘warp perceptions of time and space’.142 She goes
on to explain that the figure of the ghost is often used as a means of
apprehending that which we cannot explain, do not expect, understand, or
struggle to represent, and ‘is a way of learning to live and cope with the
notion of uncertainty.’143 By diverting the audience’s attention away from wellchartered routes across the centre of the city and inserting the words and
accounts of individuals present on the night, it allows both for the presence of
spectres to be unpicked or ‘more comprehensively understood’ and for new
historical insights to emerge.144 By opening up a means by which victims of

142

Deborah Dixon, ‘A Benevolent and Sceptical Enquiry: Exploring “Fortean Geographies”
with the Mothman’, Cultural Geographies 14 (2007), 189-210 (p. 194).
143
Dixon, p. 195.
144
Dixon, p. 196.

93



the massacre can be remembered and walked with, spectro-geographies
remind us the potential of both the ‘multi-directional and dynamic’ nature of
memories of colonial crimes, but also the possibility they open up for new,
innovative creative practice in the present day.145 The project as such is able
to create a line, or rather a series of lines (physical, virtual, figurative) that
allow for new ways of seeing, and conscious ways of walking, to emerge.
The dependency of the past archive on the architectural structure of the
present to make sense, visually alludes to the 17.10.61 project’s reorientating relationship to city spaces and its innate tie to physical landmarks
or places. This impact is enhanced by the project’s multi-sensory, immersive
nature, as the images on screen directly implicate passers-by and Parisians
in the palimpsest of collective and subjective memory. Through the oscillation
between past and present film footage projected onto real city landmarks,
17.10.61 sets up a visceral and unfolding connection between the events of
the massacre and the groups work in the present. This, in turn, opens up an
alternate reading of history in direct opposition to the notable absence of
visual clues that allude to the massacre across the city. As Nora and Aguhlon
remind us: ‘Ours is an intensely retinal and powerfully televisual memory:
How can we fail to read, in the shards of the past, the will to make the history
we are reconstructing equal to the history we have lived?’.146 These words

145
146

Rothberg, p. 23.
Pierre Nora and Maurice Agulhon, Les Lieux de mémoire : 3 vols, (Paris: Gallimard,1984-

92), p. 18.

94



seem to echo Adey’s question whether we can we just walk over the
footsteps of absent people and ‘not remember’.147 Both seem to point
towards the power of the visual and visceral qualities of memory, how it
interrupts narratives and navigations in the present. Nora and Agulhon’s
visions of the shards of the past have a halting quality that permeates
defences and subjective feelings in the present can be felt in the flesh.148 By
underlining this subjective, viscerally intrusive quality of memory in their remapping of the city space, 17.10.61 is a reminder of the possibility to reimagine both the impact of repressed or hidden memories in the present day,
but also of the open-ended and creative ways that memory traces can be reimagined in the present day, centering the experiences of those whose
voices have been long overshadowed. Through its very inception and hybrid
form across the city, 17.10.61 reinforces Rothberg’s vision of memory’s
dynamic and multi-directional quality in a very literal sense. By refusing to be
confined to phone screens and spilling over onto sides of buildings and the
streets of present-day Paris, the web-documentary serves as a physical
manifestation of the layers and currents of memory that are re-actualised,
transferred and ‘deferred between individuals’.149 By positioning itself as an

147

Maddern and Adey, p. 293.
It is important to acknowledge, however, that ‘the blind spots in Nora’s Lieux de
mémoire are symptomatic of a certain unwillingness, or incapacity, to think through the
inherent imbrication of the colonial in the national narrative as well as in the various domains
of the French every day, specifically problematic of the ‘lieu’ in order to articulate new
readings of signs and sites emblematic of French culture – of its past, its territorial locations
and its status in the contemporary moment’. Etienne Achille, Charles Forsdick and Lydie
Moudileno, ‘As Statues Fall: Rethinking the Blind Spots of French National Memory’, 24 June
2020, https://liverpooluniversitypress.blog/2020/06/24/as-statues-fall-rethinking-theblindspots-of-french-national-memory/ (accessed 7 February 2023).
149
Rothberg, p. 23.
148

95



example of the uncontained and irrepressible nature of massacre, as well as
the creative possibilities afforded by an engagement with its hidden stories,
17.10.61 acts as a direct reminder of the process of active learning afforded
to those willing to step outside the realms of state-sanctioned amnesia, to
engage with the spectral undercurrents that exist beyond it.
V.

Subverting Lines of History and Discourse

Figure 5 Still from the Raspouteam homepage <https://raspou.team/1961/>

In Lines: A Brief History, Ingold seems to pick up on this causal or relational
quality of walking. He asks, ‘What do walking, weaving, observing, singing,
storytelling, drawing and writing have in common? The answer is that they all
proceed along lines of one kind or another’. It is not just that line-making is as
ubiquitous as the use of the voice, hands and feet, respectively in speaking,
gesturing and moving around, ‘but rather that it subsumes all these aspects
of everyday human activity and, in so doing, brings them together into a

96



single field of inquiry’.150 Radley corroborates Ingold by underlining the
significance of walking as part of our investigation into memory as well as
cultural interventions related to memory. He argues that: ‘As an embodied,
and emplaced, activity, walking must always be understood as
multisensory’.151 As I outlined in my introduction, a consideration of walking in
arts practice and in (visual) ethnography brings to the fore the
interrelatedness of the visual and the other senses. This proximity to the
sights, sounds and sensations of city spaces, the way traces of these spaces
can be felt and resonate in our journeys through the city, is a reminder of the
active quality of memory politics, or of the ways in which memory
necessitates multi-directional movements (as Rothberg reminds us) “between
objects and people, places and things.”152
When thinking about the way in which the 17.10.61 project is able to weave
fragments of hidden historical discourse back into city space, it is important to
think both about how the project encourages new lines of movement across
Paris, as well as disrupting dominant lines of republican discourse that seek
to exclude the memories of the 17th October massacre from lives that are
publicly accounted for and mourned. In order to best thing about how
alternative lines of movement through city space disrupt dominant lines of
republican memory narratives, and version of what happened on the night of
the 17th October 1961 massacre, I want to explore the material and figurative

150

Tim Ingold, Lines: A Brief History (London: Routledge, 2004), p. 17.
Andrew Radley, ‘Walking across Disciplines: from Ethnography to Arts Practice’, Visual
Studies, 25 (2009), 1-7, (p. 7)
152
Rothberg, p. 28.
151

97



use of lines at various instances in the 17.10.61 project in more detail and
explore how they encourage new engagements with the script of the city. I
follow on from Tim Ingold and suggest that his conception of threads and
lines can be applied to the graphics and visual interface of the 17.10.61
project. The two primary types of lines he suggests are threads and traces.
Traces can be additive or reductive, or neither (i.e., worn path, chalk on
blackboard, stick in sand, snail trail) whilst threads bind and connect. The
third type is referred to as a ghostly line, which has no physical manifestation.
He notes that the distinction between ghostly lines and real lines is ‘decidedly
problematic’.153 We see this in the visual composition of the project itself: of
the nebulous purple and black saturation of present and past images, of the
transposition of ghostly grey vein-like lines instead of streets on to the black
background. The surface of the digital map seems to reflect a close up of
skin, creased by lines and folds marked out in grey, and then bisected by the
snaking red line of the Seine. The rich colour palette and tactile feel of the
digital map visually alludes to Frers’s vision of a ‘type of absence that is felt in
the skin’ and the way it snakes along the lines of skin and along the channels
of veins.154
The presence of red vein-like lines, of traces that look like skin folds, remind
us of the vitality of the memories that underpin the very heart of 17.10.61.
Underneath the holograms and red dots lie the traces of what seem clearly to
be veins and flesh. These, in turn, are infused with the undercurrents of lived

153
154

98

Ingold, p. 10.
Frers, p. 34.



stories and memory traces. They are imbibed both with Rice’s vision of a
human face of history, and with the knowledge that that ‘face’ was once a
person or people who lived, breathed and drew oxygen through their veins.
This vital richness extends upwards, under the surface of journeys through
the city. It invites the web documentary users not simply to follow the lines
and acknowledge presence of memory in the present, but to stop and
consider the vitality of what that ‘presence’ once was. To be present is to live
and take in air, to be conscious of one’s placement within a network of other
bodies, challenging the absence of scriptable clues (to follow on from Lia
Brozgal) that indicate how their lives were lost at the hands of state-lead
violence.
The strength of 17.10.61 lies in its reminder that history is always evolving,
unfinished. As Cresswell rightly concludes, landscapes are not finished
works, symbolic of something fixed and graspable, but rather sites of
potentiality: ‘projects, incorporating past legacies, present circumstances,
and possible futures’.155 Above all, each of these landscapes are inhabited,
worked in, and experienced in routine, everyday ways.156 Cresswell’s
intervention also serves as a reminder of the possibility for different types of
commemoration that can be afforded outside of the realms of statesanctioned historical narratives and that are made possible by creative
interventions such as the web documentary. Through 17.10.61 Paris is

155

Tim Cresswell, ‘Landscape and the Obliteration of Practice’, in Handbook of Cultural
Geography, ed. by Kay Anderson, Mona Damosh, Steve Pile and Nigel Thrift (London: Sage,
2003), 269-281 (p. 271).
156
Cresswell, p. 272.

99



imagined as an evolving space permeated by ‘multi-directional’ movements
and flows between periods of history, different bodies, combats, and
instances of pain.157 This fluidity is only extended outwards by the interactive
web-doc medium that necessitates a physical interaction on behalf of the
spectator who is required to click, to walk, to choose a path and follow the
voices that emerge from it.
Kate Nash rightly observes that this potential for audiences to interact with
documentary in various ways is at the heart of what makes these new modes
of documentary distinctive. ‘Audiences are potentially able to engage in a
range of practices from navigating virtual environments, to choosing video
content from a database, taking part in ‘chat’ sessions and creating
content.’158 The interactive, auto-directed nature of the web documentary
(with its emphasis on the visual and the sensory) can thus be seen as a
uniquely privileged medium with which to work through and experience the
potential of these spectral landscapes. If, as Connerton reminds us,
contemporary urban landscapes are made up of- and overlaid- with many
other 'scapes' including deathscapes (as I suggested at the beginning of this
intervention) then the inflections of these memories can only be accessed
through conscious, sensory immersion, through seeking to engage with
undercurrents of memory that are not necessarily visible but that are

157

Rothberg, p. 14.
Kate Nash, ‘What is Interactivity for? The Social Dimension of Web-Documentary
Participation’, Continuum: Journal of Media & Cultural Studies, 28 (2014), 383-395 (p. 384).

158

100



nonetheless part of an embodied, careful and attentive navigation of the
city.159
VI.

Casting light on forgotten places

In addition to the use of innovative web-documentary medium, 17.10.61
draws the attention of the audience back to the overlooked or forgotten parts
of the city beyond the state-sanctioned plaque. Through its dispersion of
memory traces across the city, 17.10.61 helps to offer up alternate readings
of history through the dispersal of new memory traces across the city. By
bringing about a reengagement with previously forgotten areas across the
city, the project is able to tap into pre-existing memory traces of the event. In
doing so it is able to actively highlight the gaping absences of recognition and
draw attention to the wide-ranging physical impact of the massacre,
displacing engagement away from the single memory plaque and the wellestablished emblem of the Seine. The navigation of the undercurrents of
memory through the web documentary medium should therefore be seen as
a means to transform spectator engagement with both the images on screen,
and the urban space that is depicted in these images. Manceron suggested:
La mémoire de ces évènements peut changer son rapport à
l’espace, et à la ville. Certains lieux de cette page de l’histoire ont
été détruits, écrases, rebâtis, et ces changements ont contribué à
un nettoyage, un balayage, de l’histoire.160

159

Paul Connerton, How Societies Remember (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1989), p. 13.

160

Interview Ellen Davis-Walker and Giles Manceron, Paris, 14 December 2018.

101



Manceron’s allusion to the close link between physical and memorial space is
a reminder of what Lia Brozgal describes as the lack of scriptable clues or
state testimonies to what happened on the night of the 17th October
massacre. I also believe it is an example of the ways in which a lack of
memorial space dedicated to colonial history shapes the politics of memory
and of the city in the present. Manceron’s vision of a ‘balayage’ of urban
history is deliberately resisted in 17.10.61, which overlays present-day
footage of Paris with archive images of places that no longer exist, notably
the former bidonvilles in Nanterre, which housed the majority of the FrenchAlgerian population from the 1930s onwards.161

Figure 6 Still of the bidonville at Nanterre, taken from 17.10.61
<https://raspou.team/1961/> [Last Accessed: 05/03/2019]
By weaving archival footage of the former bidonvilles into its re-mapping of
Parisian city space, 17.10.61 once again acts as means of a bringing to light

161

Anne Steiner, ‘Figures de l’immigré à Nanterre: d’un habitat stigmatisé à l’autre’, in Villes
et hospitalité, les municipalités et leurs « étrangers », ed. by Anne Gotman (Paris: Éditions
de la Maison des Sciences de l’Homme, 2004), 331-353 (p. 333)

102



memories of places and their inhabitants that have progressively been
eradicated from physical and memorial landscapes.
In Figures de l’immigré à Nanterre: d’un habitat stigmatisé à l’autre,
Anne Steiner draws attention to ‘L’éradication progressive des bidonvilles,
suivie du relogement de leurs habitants,’ which took place in the 1980s.
Although keen to highlight the social fractures that the bidonvilles
represented, she is careful to point out that, ‘Le bidonville est revendiqué
comme part du patrimoine historique de la commune’.162 By shining new light
on this former historically significant neighbourhood (and overlooked period
of French history), Steiner and the 17.10.61 seem to resist the effacement of
the bidonvilles as a sight to be swept away, or to be confined to the shadows
of social history, offering a mode of resistance to the absences and ‘lack of
script’ surrounding the events of the night (to paraphrase Brozgal). This
stance provides an echo of pre-existing traces outside of the confines of the
web documentary, reminding us of the web documentary’s extension of
Rothberg’s view of the ‘dynamic transfer’ of memory across different places,
genres and modes of representation.163 By rooting the stories from Nanterre
from the point of view of the Bidonvilles that no longer exist, 17.10.61 enters
into a direct dialogue with a long history of absence, as well as with the
legacy of cultural and literary production addressing the 17th October 1961
massacre that exists alongside the official (lack of) memory on the part of the
French state. One of the most significant of these is arguably Leila Sebbar’s

162
163

Steiner, p. 345.
Rothberg, p. 28.

103



novel La Seine était rouge164, which remains one of the major literary cultural
treatments of the massacre to have emerged in France. Over the course of
the novel, much like the audience of the 17.10.61 project, Sebbar’s three
characters attempt to uncover repressed memories of the night of the 17th
October, looking for traces of Lia Brozgal’s script and any traces of memory
that may remain across the city. When examining how the amnesia
surrounding the people and places central to the massacre is challenged in
the novel, Lewis writes:
This breaking of the silence has not led to a calm levelling of
memory, but to a turbulent surge of memories in which opposing
representations of the past clash. Sebbar's novel underlines this
instability, bringing to light a plurality of memories collected from
various actors in the events of 17 October 1961.165
The novel is structured around the memorial traces and links between sites
of modern-day Paris and their previous function. Whilst Sebbar does not
linger excessively on the memory of the bidonville spaces, the characters of
Nora and Omar are nonetheless drawn back to it, reminded of its importance
despite its physical erasure from the landscape they are currently standing
on. 17.10.61 seems to respond directly to the repetitive movement of
Sebbar’s central protagonists written over ten years previously, firmly
establishing itself within a creative tradition of scripting traces of the 17th
October massacre in the absence of any official state memorials or

164

Leila Sebbar, La Seine était rouge: Paris octobre 1961 (Paris: Actes Sud, 2009).
Jonathan Lewis, ‘Filling in the Blanks: Memories of 17 October 1961 in Leïla Sebbar’s La
Seine était rouge’, Modern and Contemporary France, 20 (2012), 307-322 (p. 309).

165

104



recognition, drawing the focus of the audience back to the places and sites
with affective ties to the state’s long disavowed crimes.

Figure 7 Image of Modern-Day Nanterre, taken from 17.10.61
<https://raspou.team/1961/> [Last Accessed: 05/03/2019]

This sense of a return to (and affective remapping of) Nanterre and
surrounding banlieue if present is echoed in archival footage of slum
developments juxtaposed with high-rise buildings, officers and developments.
166

This oscillation between the present-day modern architecture and the

debasing conditions that Algerian occupants of the bidonvilles were forced to
endure, creates what Lars Frers has dubbed as:
Different kind of awareness of power relations, and of easily
forgotten and overlooked subaltern positions that might be washed
into oblivion by the fast-moving current of the contemporary, deeply
political distribution of attention.167

166
167

Frers, p. 23.
Lewis, p. 309.

105



17.10.61 is therefore able to cast light on these power relations, allowing for
a crucial re-tracing of that dynamic within public space, allowing audience
members a unique insight into the realities of the 17th October massacre.
Whilst the group gave very few interviews in the run up to their live
projections and interventions in 2011, they did agree to speak with author
and director David Dufresne about their work. When asked about their
decision to occupy the public space with fragments of narrative (to render
memory as something that had to pieced together as a collective ensemble
by the public and in the public sphere), the group’s response echoes Frers’
thoughts about the politics of absence. The group’s representative replied:
‘L’espace public c’est celui qu’on partage avec les autres. C’est là où devrait
primer l’organisation et l’expression collective. C’est une autre façon
d’entretenir le flou entre hier et aujourd’hui’.168
The fluidity or “flou” between past and present that is evoked by Dufrense
translates directly onto the fabric of the stories and the lines ‘wonderful as
they are unsettling ‘that the project traces out. The public space becomes a
means with which to be immersed in history, to be conscious of Harvey’s
vision of the ‘swirling sea of goods and sensations’ that generate pleasure
and pain for those who choose to step into it.169
VII.

168
169

Imaginative Geographies and Mindful Walking

Raspouteam, 17.10.61
Harvey, p. 2.

106



By turning the gaze of the spectator on to the spectral undercurrents over the
urban landscape, 17.10.61 demands a questioning of the ways in which we
trace out the contours of the landscape (through lines, traces, or words).
17.10.61 directly encompasses Catherine Nash’s vision of new ‘Imaginative
Geographies’: forms of resistance to ‘colonial, cultural as well as political and
material subordination, and new geographies of identity that challenge the
fixities of nationalism as well as colonialism’.170 I argue that this vision of a
new geography is extended by the project’s capacity to bridge and assimilate
the digital and the affective. In drawing on a rich body of cultural production
surrounding the events of that night, 17.10.61 allows for imagined characters
to bring real-life testimony to the surface of the city. The call to engage with,
and move through space, be it virtually or literally, transforms the visual and
associative relationship with the space. In becoming an active walker, or
what I describe in my previous chapter as an ‘attentive reader and walker in
space’, the spectator is an active participant in a re-imagining of history and
of its re-mapping on to the urban and memorial landscape of the city.171 He
or she becomes part of the challenge to state-perpetrated silence.
The 17.10.61 project thus becomes a means to encompass Nash’s vision of
an imaginative geography that provides an active resistance to the
homogenising drive of colonial history or the overwhelming presence of
colonial narratives in the city. Indeed, by mapping out the traces of the

170

Catherine Nash. ‘Cultural Geography: Postcolonial Cultural Geographies’, Progress in
Human Geography, 26 (2002), 219–30 (p. 220).
171
De Certeau, p. 16.

107



ghostly and the spectral that run across the city, 17.10.61 is able to challenge
geography's concern with the ‘rational, the ordered, and the sane’.172
Indeed, 17.10.61’s emergence as what I refer to as a digital spectrogeography: a means with the possibility to engage with the lessons offered
up by the legacies of the 17th October massacre and the forgotten stories
and voices it offers up. By creating new routes around the city that seek both
to give visual clues to what happened on the night of the massacre and
illustrate the ways in which over-looked memories spill over into the everyday
spaces and neighbourhoods beyond the centralised state-approved plaque
on Pont St. Michel, 17.10.61 sheds light on the power of memory traces and
the alternative readings of history they contain. We see this specifically in
Raspouteam’s videos on the 17.10.61 homepage through the intrusion of
iconic Parisian landmarks and strong signifiers of place (such as close ups of
iconic and ornate Metro entrances, shining under rain as they would have
been on the night of the 17th October 1961).

172

Harvey, p. 13.

108



Figure 8 Still taken from 17.10.61 < https://raspou.team/1961/ >[Last
Accessed: 02/03/2020]

The oscillation between high and low angle shots, coupled with the
emergence of past images from newspapers and archives that dissolve into
footage from the present day, means 17.10.61 challenges a fixed sense of
place and time. As each video jumps to different locations around Paris, and
glides between different observations and voices the spectator is forced to
relinquish a sense of the ‘rational’, the ‘ordered’, and the ‘sane’. They, too,
are buffeted along by the voices and footsteps of entities and people who
once walked the same streets of Paris, who demand space and place to be
tended to, again and again.
The presence of the human face of memory on phone screens as well as
walls and paving stones further underlines the presence of an active
undercurrent of memory traces and the alternate readings of history that
provide. By journey through present-day Paris accompanied by the faces and
testimonies of the ghostly holograms at the heart of the documentary, the
memories of the night — and the literal scripted clues produced by
Raspouteam — insidiously feed into our paths that are ‘as wonderful as they
are unsettling’.173 As David Pinter argues:
These echoes and whispers filter into the present tense, reminders
of previous steps that have been taken this way and of how lives
and activities intertwine – and part – through these times and

173

Frers, p. 14.

109



spaces. As the city’s fabric changes, so do the spaces through
which memories take form.174
I suggest that Pinter’s conception of walking provides a direct point of
comparison with Chamoiseau (and also Silverman’s) vision of memory traces
that the project is able to disperse across the city. In turn, the echoes and
whispers created a connection between spaces and their uses and histories,
allowing for these spaces to gain new forms of materiality, or material weight.
Spaces become richer through their potential to disrupt temporalities and
ways of seeing, by revealing themselves as being unfinished works that are
not in any way symbolic ‘of something fixed and graspable’.175
Indeed, by doing so 17.10.61 offers up a memorial landscape that is not
restrained or contained by the unjust absence of thousands of protestors who
met the end of their lives in the Seine. It is not arrested by absence, but
“creatively, carefully, imaginatively open to exploring the potential of it
seeking out presence in absence.”176 In offering up human faces of history
which encompass the material, affective and political qualities of absence, we
are reminded once again that loss is anything but a void. Absence will always
manifest itself in ‘concrete places, people and things’, precisely because
people and things were once present, participating, vocal and alive.177 The
potential of absence to be lived and represented as presence, reminds us of
17.10.61’s function as a guerrilla memorial that can change our relationship

174

David Pinder, ‘Ghostly Footsteps: Voices, Memories and Walks in the City’, Ecumene, 8.
2001, 1-19, (p. 1)
175
Frers, p. 15.
176
Nash, p. 219.
177
Frers, p. 20.

110



to national memory. By dialogising history with other forms, such as
biography, folklore, memorials and artistic representation, 17.10.61 helps to
fill that ‘contested history with the memories and experiences it needs in
order to reflect a more accurate and human face’.178

Figure 9 Still taken from 17.10.61 < https://raspou.team/1961/ > [Last
Accessed: 02/02/2020]

Stories from that night become alive in embodied and place-related
memories. Their presence on smart phone screens and their resonance in
our subsequent trajectories around the city become a reminder of the
potentiality of the landscapes that we journey across. It speaks to (and says
something about) their unfinished nature, of their potential to be filled with
multifarious voices and forms of history. As Frers points out, absences need

178

Rice, p. 22.

111



memories to fill them with life, ‘just as they need traces in the socio-material
world that can draw them into a present situation’.179 This central importance
of memories, the importance of remembering, is what is carried (poignantly)
away from any engagement with the project, and with the landscape(s) it
offers up.
VIII.

From Absence to Presence: Learning To Walk With Ghosts

Over the course of this chapter, I have sought to highlight the potential of
initiatives such as the 17.10.61 to affectively re-map memory back into city
spaces is one that extends out beyond the realms of the project itself into
activist and artistic responses to the anniversary of the massacre. The ways
in which the memory of disavowed events can be worked into city space, and
challenge the ways in which we move through it, are helpful for thinking
about the ways in which the annual citizen and activist-lead commemorations
of the 17th October massacre mirrors the memorial function of the 17.10.61
project though the way it gives recourse to subjective experiences and
underlines the symbolic and haunting role of certain key sites across the city.
In the weeks leading up to the anniversary in 2017, 2018 and 2019, calls
were put forward on social media by groups such as the collective Sortir du
Colonialisme, and SOS Racisme. An Algerian flag was draped across the
sides of the bridges and roses tossed over the side into the water,

179

Frers, p. 23.

112



accompanied on occasion by family members and relatives who walked
along next to the floating lone flowers, for a while.180

Figure 10 Photograph taken from the 17th October anniversary ceremony in
2018 [Photo author’s own]

For all the stillness and the calm of a slow setting sun, the movements of the
flowers buffeted against the water feels hauntingly symbolic. To paraphrase
Frers, absences point to undercurrents, be they in bodies of water snaking
through the heart of a capital city, or to the fluctuations of memory that
undulate across digital platforms and material surfaces of the urban
landscape. Absences always point to entities that are not there or

180

It is significant to note that the 2021 ceremony (three years after my original fieldwork)
was attended by French president Emmanuel Macron who officially denounced the horrors
of the massacre, labelling it an ‘inexcusable crime’. See AFP, ‘Massacre du 17 octobre 1961:
Emmanuel Macron dénonce « des crimes inexcusables », « commis sous l’autorité de
Maurice Papon »’, Le Monde, 16 October 2021
https://www.lemonde.fr/societe/article/2021/10/16/massacre-du-17-octobre-1961-emmanuelmacron-denonce-des-crimes-inexcusables-commis-sous-l-autorite-du-prefet-de-policemaurice-papon_6098670_3224.html (accessed 8 August 2022).

113



Seemingly not covered by phenomenological approaches to
geography hat would confine human perception and presence to
living 181.
They are not, therefore, immaterial, nor what Frers describes as ‘a mere
thought without an anchor in the corporeal world, sometimes there,
sometimes not there’.182An absence arises in the experience; it is a relational
phenomenon that constitutes itself in corporeal perceptions: in flesh, in
feeling, in the weight of footsteps on pavements and hands on the edge of
bridges, and fingers releasing long, elegant rose stems into water warmed by
an unseasonably warm October sun. Attempts to theorise absence outside
the realm of the sensory — thinking about it in terms that do not implicate
gestures, or words half-uttered, or sensations that are so deeply felt — is a
discredit to absence’s painfully relational quality.
This chapter has focused on these sites of absence, of the techniques, lines,
hidden faces and landmarks within the 17.10.61 project that have been lost
or are missing. I have suggested that an engagement with these memorial
undercurrents present across the postcolonial city (and specifically, in this
case, in Paris) can help us to embody and enact Derrida’s politics of memory
and heritage. I have demonstrated how this process has been aided through
the cultural contribution of the 17.10.61 project and thus, by extension,
through the proliferation of new technologies. I have considered how the use
of smart phone screens and online platforms allow for what Rice describes
as an emergence of guerrilla memorialisation.

181
182

Frers, p. 12.
Frers, p. 13.

114



Following spectro-digital maps on foot extends the relational quality of
absence outward to encompass those who engage with 17.10.61. It is not
simply a map to be followed, but one that is filled with echoes and whispers
that demand understanding and consideration. It is a type of haunting that is
not about frightening or forgetting, but about the ‘richer understandings of
time, place, and materiality that can become available to us’.183 I follow
Meier, Frers and Sigvardsdotter’s thinking that absences demand attention
and action because they relate to public and personal narratives or
memories. In short, they generate the same consciousness of subjective
placement or displacement that we feel with absence.
A change of focus is thus urgently needed to give a
different kind of awareness of power relations, and of easily
forgotten and overlooked subaltern positions that might be washed
into oblivion by the fast-moving current of the contemporary, deeply
political distribution of attention.184
Those who are not allowed to be physically present might even have to hide,
they might have to maintain their absence from the eyes and tracking
technologies used by those in power, ‘or aim to put up a struggle for the right
to decide about their presence and absence themselves’.185
Over the course of this chapter, I have suggested that the creation of
spectro-digital geographies — or incorporating more immersive technological
practices into our journeys through the postcolonial city — can encourage a

183

Frers, p. 11.
Frers, p. 12.
185
Frers, p. 13.
184

115



new and more affective engagement with disavowed historical legacies.
Combining an analysis of the moving images projected back on to Parisian
streets with a more affective analysis of how the projects visual and visceral
representation of hidden voices, I was able to suggest that moving closer to
ghosts lost in the swells of the Seine, allowing ourselves to be a receptive
presence of ghosts waiting to be mourned and heard, was possible should
we want it to be. Through their use of multi-platform technology, moving
images and site-specific installations, the project can be seen as a call to
take ghosts literally - to sense rather than see, to paraphrase Tranströmer, as
we move through the city and around sites of long-silenced crimes.
In A Field Guild to Getting Lost, Solnit reminds us that coming to terms with
any sense of loss is not about forgetting but letting go. To let go it is
necessary to recognise its necessary longevity, the slowness of gestures, the
physical difficulty of relinquishing grip, and loosening fingers from around a
long rose stem some 50 years later. It is a call to recognise how loss will one
day require us to change the subjective ‘powerful narrative’ we had written in
our mind, or had used to help us navigate journeys through cities and
landscapes ‘implicated in the negotiation of the past and the present’.186
These questions about how the 17th October massacre is challenging
narratives of cultural progress and transforming the ways in which
communities with ties to the events of that night experience certain localities
will be carried over into the next chapter with an analysis of Kader Attia’s La

186

Solnit, Wanderlust, p. 40.

116



Colonie and the varied creative and academic responses to modern day
traces of colonial legacies in city space.

117



Chapter 2: Examining Paris’s ‘Haunting Economy’ Through Kader
Attia’s La Colonie
I.

La Colonie: Towards a process of social reckoning

In Haneke’s Caché (2005)187, the central protagonist Georges is haunted by
disturbing visions and unsettling letters, as the legacy of the 17th October
massacre spills into his present-day life and interactions in his day-to-day
space. Georges’ obsessive re-calling of images of drowned bodies and the
emblem of the Seine are an example of what Schaefer describes as physical
markers of long-suppressed crimes: a reminder throughout the film of ‘the
bodily markers that French Republican universalism cannot wash away’.188
Much like the 17.10.61 project analysed in my previous chapter, Haneke’s
protagonist comes to discover the ways in which stories and traces of ghosts
spill over into present-day subjectivity and spaces and into the way the city is
traversed, experienced and attended to. They are a reminder of the traces of
colonial inequalities that spill into present day spaces and into the everyday
lives of descendants of these massacres, demanding further attention and
explanation.
Just as Michael Haneke’s Caché ultimately reminds the viewer, an
understanding of how violent historical legacies continue to linger — and feed
into present-day socio-economic factors in space — is part of a process of
acknowledging the impact of memory traces in city space, as well as being
187

Michael Haneke (dir.), Caché (Les Films de Losange, 2005).
Joy Schaefer, ‘The spatial-affective Economy of (Post)colonial Paris: reading
Haneke’s Caché (2005) through Octobre à Paris (1962)’, Studies in European Cinema, 14
(2017), 48–65 (p. 50).

188

118



open to what present-day power imbalances or power inequalities linger in
the area around the venue.
This chapter returns to the traces of these bodies and their legacies, and will
continue to explore both the ways in which the legacy of the 17th October
massacre was commemorated at Kader Attia’s La Colonie and how legacies
of discrimination and inequality attached to that night have become part of
wider processes of gentrification and changes in city space. Situated on the
edge of the quartiers of Barbès and La Goutte d’Or (between the 18th and
19th arrondissements) in the northeast of Paris, Kader Attia’s creative multipurpose space (with its own bar, gallery and projection room), hosts a yearround programme of events dedicated to confronting France’s colonial
legacies.
Leading on from my analysis of the 17.10.61 web documentary, I am using
the example of La Colonie to return to the question of whether an
engagement with colonial ghosts demands a return to politics of present-day
space, and their socio-economic realities. By combining my analysis of La
Colonie’s contribution

to the memorialisation of the 17th October

massacre with an analysis of national collections, including those displayed
at the Musée National de l’Histoire de l’Immigration (MNHI), I hope to
explore the different ways in which colonial legacies and the 17th October
massacre are represented on both a grassroots and national level, as well
as providing insights on the sorts of necessary creative practice needed to

119



tend to, and honour, disavowed ghosts of that night.189 I will also go on to ask
how legacies of discrimination towards (and unequal access opportunities
for) communities historically targeted by state and police violence continue to
be perpetrated around (and sometimes as a direct result of) artistic or cultural
practices.190 By shifting from a macro-analysis of a community-specific
shared site to national collections carried out with descendants of the 17th
October massacre in mind, we turn towards the subjective stories of memory
and loss that an engagement with the spectral can uncover as well as
expanding our understanding of the complicated — and sometimes fraught
— process of commemorating historical injustices. I build on from
‘Postcolonial Activists and European Museums’, in which Katrin Sieg
encapsulates this uneasy positionality by suggesting that:
In context where colonial history is not consistently integrated into
school curricula and public spheres, museums have become key
sites for decolonizing myths of national genius and European
superiority. On the one hand, they model newly cooperative modes
of storytelling. On the other hand, they help legitimate critical, yet
marginalized perspectives long considered threatening to a
191
consensus-oriented museology
My intention with this analysis is not to add to ongoing scholarly debates
about gentrification within Parisian neighbourhoods specifically or to delve
too deeply into ongoing debates about decolonising museums and
collections. My intention is to shine a light on the complicated ways that

189

See: Musée de l’histoire de l’immigration, https://www.histoire-immigration.fr/ (accessed
13 February 2020).
190
Fiona Barclay, Writing Postcolonial France: Haunting, Literature and the Maghreb
(Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2011), p. 20.
191
Katrin Sieg, ‘Postcolonial Activists and European Museums’, in Reframing Postcolonial
Studies, ed. by David Kim (Cham: Palgrave Macmillan, 2021), pp. 215–17 (p. 216).

120



memory traces invariably intersect with (and are tied to) long standing
legacies of socio-economic precarity or state-backed discrimination, even in
instances (such as the Musée National de L’Histoire de L’Immigration) where
the state is taking steps to centre the experiences of communities that it is
has historically discriminated against. 192 In doing so, this chapter seeks to
build on Avery Gordon’s thoughts about the ‘transformative power of
haunting’ — that is to say its capacity to bring about a process of selfreflection — and sets up an interesting new dynamic from which to return to
the city of Paris and the events of the 17th October massacre more
specifically. What are some of the ways that La Colonie contributes to what
Mary Stevens describes as a “peaceful accommodation” of the area’s
193

ghosts?

In what ways does the ‘ambiguity’ of this commemoration process

—and specifically the gentrifying qualities of the building in the area — teach
us about how legacies of inequality and discrimination impact communities
with ties to the massacre? And finally, how can an understanding of the
presence of ghosts help inform our engagement with the rapidly shifting face
of France’s contemporary memorial landscape and new cultural practices
that have emerged?
I will look specifically at the space’s commemoration of the 1961 massacre
on the night of the 17th October 2018, and its location within what Avery
Gordon describes as a process of social reckoning: a coming to terms with,

192

Davis, p. 378.
Mary Stevens, ‘Still the Family Secret? The Representation of Colonialism in the Cité
Nationale de l’Histoire de l’Immigration’, African and Black Diaspora: An International
Journal, 2 (2009), 245–55, (p. 250).

193

121



approaching towards, and understanding of inherited and half-sensed ghosts,
and opening a process of dialogue with them. To do so, I will also make
specific reference to Samia Henni’s temporary exhibition housed within La
Colonie, entitled ‘Discreet Violence: L’architecture et la guerre française en
Algérie that addressed the spatial legacies of the 17th October 1961, as well
as the anniversary events hosted at the La Colonie in October 2018, which
included a screening of Yasmina Audi’s documentary ‘Ici on noie les
Algériens’ (2010).194
I open my analysis with the suggestion that representations of, and
responses to, colonial history within present-day Paris remain irrevocably tied
to Barclay’s vision of economic haunting in contemporary France. More
specifically, I will address some of the representational and ethical
challenges that documenting colonial history (and its present-day legacies)
can pose to curators, artists

and cultural practitioners such as Kader Attia,

whose work and outreach are paradoxically contributing to the progressive
urban development of traditionally multi-cultural and diverse neighbourhoods
such as the 18th and 19th arrondissement that border La Colonie. When
outlining her vision of the link between the colonial crimes and the presentday ramifications (both for city spaces and living communities), Fiona Barclay
aptly argues:
France’s ghosts are produced by socio-historical factors, but
they cannot be accommodated easily within socio-economic

194

This was hosted at La Colonie from 19 June–14 July 2018.

122



realities. Exclusion is a recurring motif, a marker which regulates
the haunting economy of the spectral.195
The motif of France’s haunting past and present-day economy will form a
vital part of this chapter; a point from which to consider how journeys through
the postcolonial city respond to the presence of tangible and enduring clues
left behind in the wake of ghosts. I am concerned here with how the
transformative presence of spectres in postcolonial landscapes opens up an
awareness of the ‘haunting economy’ that is at work. Through the process of
following ghosts, we become aware of both the material economic realities
that still continue to haunt parts of the city, as well as the affective economy
of loss and

absence (what Lars Frers describes as the connection to ‘skin

and flesh’) that the presence of the dead will stir. 196
In light of the enduring haunting quality of legacies of the 17th October
massacre for survivors and their relatives, the intersections between presentday spaces feel all the more prescient and visible. The stories told by, or tied
to, France’s ghosts offer themselves to the collective imagination, and feed
into our trajectories through and around present-day Paris. As Akile Ahmet
reminds us:
Place and constructions of places are bounded by interactions with
class, ethnicity, sexuality, gender and race. Hence the space [of
home] is defined and constructed through identity and ultimately
can come to mean an unbounded sense of belonging.197

195

Barclay, p. 20.
Frers, p. 12.
197
Akile Ahmet, ‘Home Sites: The Location(s) of “Home” for Young Men’, Urban Studies, 50
(2013), 621–34 (p. 621).
196

123



I suggest that thinking about Akile Ahmet’s assertion of the link between
class, race and the material construction of space can help us re-engage with
questions of the haunting quality of colonial history. This deliberately dual
perspective can thus bring the memory of the 17th October 1961 into contact
with Avery Gordon’s vision of a process of self-reflection. Thinking about the
literal and affective economic traces left behind by ghosts or haunting
legacies of colonial crimes, we can more carefully understand how contact
with them ‘changes’ us and ‘refashions social relationships’.198 By returning
to what I shall refer to as the enduring economy of the spectral, we can refashion our perspective on how the legacy of the massacre continues to
determine experiences of ‘unbounded belonging’ in Paris, both in its streets
and across a broader memorial landscape.199 Being aware of the presence of
inequalities within spaces and their sometimes contradictory functions allows
us to move beyond what Gordon describes as the fundamental alienation of
‘turning social relations into just the things we know’.200 It allows us to move
closer to our own reckoning with ‘how we are in these stories, with how they
change us, with our own ghosts’, and understand how forms of space can
echo and respond to traumatic memories.201 By focusing our attention on the
outreach work and exhibits of La Colonie we can form a more complete
picture of how these spaces are experienced, and the different legacies of
and responses to colonial history that are continuously at work within them.

198

Gordon, p. 22.

199

Ahmet, p. 621.
Gordon, p. 24.
201
Gordon, p. 22.
200

124



Indeed, by attending to the traces of ghosts and the present-day politics they
leave in their wake, the venue embodies the complicated positionality of ‘être
avec les spectres’, of following their footsteps through certain spaces and
locations.202 David Pinter’s evocation of ‘following the footsteps of ghosts’
reminds us of the proximity between haunting and present-day subjectivity, of
the way ghosts require us to account for the ways we move through space,
as well as the freedom and positionality that we may or may not occupy in
that space.203 They demand a movement towards our own social reckoning
with ghosts, and an understanding of the ways in which they still linger in
spaces, challenging our spatial and creative outreach work in the spaces
they have inhabited.
II.

Exclusion and Social Haunting

The systematic exclusion of the legacy of the 17th October massacre from
national monuments and discourses, as I have demonstrated in my previous
chapter on the 17.10.61 project, only serves to exacerbate literal and
figurative haunting of spaces, both through the gaping absence of
monuments and public recognition of guilt, and through the enduring
discrimination facing third or fourth generation immigrants descended from
survivors or victims of the massacre. Leopold Lambert draws directly on
these questions of socio-economic exclusion in Parisian space and uses it to
re-frame engagements with the 17th October 1961 massacre providing an
important point of re-entry into Paris, to examine the haunting quality of the

202
203

Gordon, p. 22.
Pinder, p. 18.

125



massacre on present-day Parisian space. Lambert’s work highlights the
disparities between the experiences of descendants of the 1961 massacre in
Parisian space, and the lack of memorial and commemorative evidence of
the events in the space. In his appraisal of the carto-chronology of the 1961
massacre in Paris, he writes:
More than 27% of France’s current population was alive in 1961,
and many actors in the October 17 massacre, Algerian
demonstrators and French police officers, still carry its memory, its
traumatic wounds (for the former) and its immunity to responsibility
(for the latter).204
These dynamics, he suggests, are amplified by the material makeup of
Paris’s urban and cultural landscapes, dynamics where:
Racialized subjects whose lives are often territorially, socially, and
economically segregated from their privileged counterparts. Paris
being a city that has not structurally changed since the second part
of the 19th century, weaponized spatiality remains fully operative
today.205
Lambert’s view of weaponised space is one that needs to be reconciled with
the traces of ghosts and the socio-economic inequalities that linger as a
result of France’s ongoing ties to its colonial history. Whilst Lambert’s
invocation of segregation inherent in present-day Parisian space is one I wish
to build on in this chapter, I suggest that the term weaponised spatiality
(particularly in the light of the violence shadow of the 2015 terrorist attacks
and everyday instances of exclusion that still take place in city space)

is

one that should be treated with caution. Rather than thinking about the
204

Leopold Lambert, ‘Chrono-Cartology of the October 17, 1961 Massacre of Algerians in
Paris’, The Funambulist, 22 May 2017, https://thefunambulist.net/app/uploads/2017/05/MapOctober-17-1961-by-L%C3%A9opold-Lambert-The-Funambulist-2017.jpg (accessed 14 July
2018).
205
Lambert, ‘Chrono-Cartology’.

126



potential violence of space, this chapter will seek to further assess the
inclusivity (and socio-economic undertones) of contemporary memory work. I
will also ask how the presence of Kader Attia’s multi-purpose building La
Colonie can be part of ‘spatial strategies of creating, critiquing and
problematizing the city’.206
This is particularly significant in the case of the 17th October 1961, whose
legacy remains primarily propelled forward (and carried) by the very grassroots activists and practitioners who are being pushed out of neighbourhoods
where cultural initiatives are being championed, but whose legacies and work
is still noticeably absent from many national museum collections such as the
Musée National de L’Histoire de L’Immigration. By examining the cultural
facilities and outreach work hosted by La Colonie, this chapter will ask how
they intersect with Clerval and Fleury’s vision of ‘spatial strategies of
creating, critiquing and problematizing the city’ , which bore the brunt of a
damning report published by the Observatoire de la politique de la ville (OPV)
in 2018–2019.207
This chapter’s engagement with local and national level collections that
engage with minority memory aims to build on Clerval and Fleury’s call to
critique, and will aim to examine the complex interplay between cultural
representation carried out by actors like Kader Atta, and the sometimes
uncomfortable socio-economic tensions or fallouts to which this work

206

Clerval and Fleury, p. 165.
OPV Observatoire National de la Politique de la Ville, Rapport 2018: Emploi et
développement économique dans les quartiers prioritaires, 8 (2019), 10-11, (p. 10)

207

127



contributes.208 I suggest that cultural outreach work and innovative creative
practice are central in bringing about a reckoning with a ‘haunted’ and
haunting spectral economy present in city space. This becomes particularly
significant when addressing culturally disavowed or maligned legacies like
the Algerian War of Independence and the 17th October 1961 massacre,
which continue to be spatially and culturally excluded from Parisian urban
space.209
A 2018 report published by the l’Observatoire national de la politique de la
ville (OPV) highlighted the enduring presence of France’s ‘reckoning’ with its
210

socio-economic ghosts in urban space.

Drawing on data obtained from the

Grand Paris region from 2017-2018, the report strongly criticised the
precarious situation facing residents of Paris’ quartiers populaires, including
in the 18th/19th where La Colonie is situated. The report’s findings drew
particular attention to the ‘deterioration’ of economic conditions which has left
inhabitants twice as likely to be unemployed or employed on precarious
short-term contracts (CDD), occupying low-skilled jobs, or in insecure
accommodation.211

208

Kathleen Brogan, ‘American Stories of Cultural Haunting: Tales of Heirs and
Ethnographers’ College English, 2 (1995), 149–65 (p. 152).
209
There is currently only one plaque commemorating the 17th October massacre, which is
located on the side of the Pont St Michel in Paris, but this does not make reference to the
number of victims or the role of the French police and state in perpetrating the violence.
210
l’Observatoire national de la politique de la ville (OPV), ‘Emploi et développemt
économique dans les quartiers prioritaires’,(p. 10)
211
‘La situation au regard de l’emploi et du développement économique est donc détériorée
dans les quartiers prioritaires, définis fin 2014 à partir de critères relatifs à la concentration
urbaine de pauvreté. Même si une partie de l’amélioration de la situation des habitants n’est
pas mesurée du fait de leurs déménagements’, ‘Emploi et dévelopment économique dans
les quartiers prioritaires’, (p. 10)

128



Whilst at the time of writing this thesis no figures were available for the 20192020 year, it is clear that these findings will only have been exacerbated all
the more acutely in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic. As such, it is
important to pause and reflect here on the role La Colonie has played in
contributing to the wider socio-economic climate of the neighbourhood where
it finds itself. Alongside this, there is also a need to take time to unpack the
affective and creative contribution its exhibits and broader cultural outreach
work make to commemorations of the 17th October massacre. This chapter
thus aims to directly build on Freedgood and Schmitt’s call to take ‘literal
ghosts figuratively and figurative ghosts literally’.212 By turning our attention to
the parallel strands of spectral subjectivity and material haunting economy at
work in the La Colonie we might come to a dual ‘social reckoning’ (that is to
say an understanding and acknowledgement of) the ghosts of the 17th
October massacre, and the present-day economic realities left behind in their
wake.213 By turning our attention to the affective dimension of haunting and
ghosts, I want to also stress the need to assess how this intersects with wider
economic questions in the locations where the events of that night are
commemorated. I am particularly interested in how communities with ties to
the legacies of the 17th October 1961 are impacted by the aforementioned
urban redevelopment projects in the 18th and 19th arrondissement that border
La Colonie and rue LaFayette (most notably in La Goutte d’or and La
Chappelle). Being attentive to the spectral undertones and present-day

212

Elaine Freedgood and Cannon Schmitt, ‘Denotatively, Technically, Literally’,
Representations, 125 (2014), 1–14 (p. 14).
213
Social reckoning is a direct reference to Gordon (2008).

129



socio-economic exclusion in space allows us to move beyond what Gordon
describes as the fundamental alienation of ‘turning social relations into just
the things we know’. It allows us to move closer to our own reckoning with
‘how we are in these stories, with how they change us, with our own ghosts’
and understand the ways in which the legacies of both the 17th October
massacre and France’s colonial past more broadly, are being elevated
through targeted artistic and cultural interventions.214
III.

La Colonie and Cultural Haunting

Before moving on to analyse the collections hosted in the venue, it is
necessary to look at the ways in which La Colonie’s presence on Rue
LaFayette helps to contribute to the haunting quality of French socioeconomic inequalities, and what the hidden ghosts of colonial legacies in and
around the area materially look like.
In ‘Still the family secret? The representation of colonialism in the Cité
Nationale de l’Histoire de l’Immigration215 Mary Stevens argues that
The silence that has long surrounded France's colonial past is not
the product of some uncontrollable collective psychic event but
rather the result of a concatenation of decisions and non-decisions
by active agents.
As Stevens suggests, in exploring the discourse around colonialism in a
particular setting it is possible to ‘shed some light on the particular

214
215

Gordon, p. 22.
Stevens, p. 246.

130



interpersonal, institutional and disciplinary mechanisms that authorized or
blocked its expression.’
When considering the ways in which Kader Attia’s La Colonie honours and
commemorates the legacy of the 17th October massacre on a cultural level,
we must also be mindful of Stevens’ thinking about the accommodation of
ghosts and legacies - that is to say, the extent to which certain types of lived
experience and the socio-economic realities central to Barclay’s vision of
France’s haunting economy are enacted or not.216 Re-framing the legacy of
the 17th October 1961 thus requires us to return to tangible, fixed points
around the city, and to articulate the complex relationships to the material
and affective haunting economy, as well to either real or imagined ghosts. On
one level, Kader Attia’s La Colonie offers both a celebration of innovative
cultural production, and a warning against the danger of innate introspection.
The space acts as a specific reminder of the danger in overshadowing
complex socio-economic realities with the voices and experiences of one
socio group or network. It is also a reminder that any curatorial decisions and
non-decisions, as Stevens reminds us, particularly in regard to what voices
are included or elevated in a venue, perpetuate or in some cases exacerbate
dynamics of privilege that spill over into the space around it. Through its
commemoration of ghosts or interest in them La Colonie is caught up in what
Gordon describes as a ‘process of social reckoning’ with its own limitations
and networks that are necessitated by a confrontation with the spectral.217

216
217

Barclay p. 246; and Stevens p. 247.
Gordon, p. 29.

131



Despite this incomplete or fragmented nature of its confrontation with the
spectral presence of the 17th October, La Colonie provides an important
point of departure with which to examine how cultural institutions that help
commemorate colonial crimes can also become engines of gentrification that
help to perpetrate unequal systems of power and oppression in the present
day. It marks a crucial first step in a reckoning with ghosts whilst serving as
an enduring reminder of the fault lines in France’s fractured political and
socio-economic landscapes.
Indeed, the venue’s complex relationship with what Anne Clerval and Antoine
Fleury have dubbed the ‘embourgeoisement de Paris’ or its role in the
progressive gentrification of the quartiers of La Goutte d’Or and La Chappelle
which border it, remind us of how commemorating colonial ghosts demands a
return to, and an engagement with, the politics of space. By understanding
how commemorative artistic practices can help to perpetuate colonial
dynamics of power in relation to postcolonial space, we can move closer
towards Mary Steven’s vision of ‘peaceful accommodation’ of the complexity
and ambiguity surrounding how colonial legacies are remembered in presentday commemorative and cultural spaces.
During an interview held at La Colonie in 2018, Attia was quick to posit the
space as an inclusive and accessible venue for visitors and locals alike.218
He commented:

218

I have tried on numerous occasions to interview Kader Attia personally, but my requests
have been continually denied. Although I have managed to speak to other actors within the
venue, my references to Attia’s comments regrettably come from second-hand sources.

132



First of all, we are close to Gare du Nord; there are five bus stops in
front of us, and the space faces onto the street, which means a lot.
Unlike the Palais de Tokyo or another museum, you do not need to
go to a different neighbourhood and pay for a ticket to come here
and get the feeling of becoming part of another world that reflects
reality. This is an open space that everybody can enter. That is why
the coffee on the first floor is so important: it actually attracts a very
large audience. In Paris but also elsewhere, coffee shops have
since the French Revolution been places of political resistance, and
created links within the population in the first place.219
Although La Colonie in many ways upholds this vision of openness and
intellectual debate (a point I will return to in more detail later), it is important
to stress that a number of key factors problematise the question of its
inclusivity that Attia’s interview sets up. My intention is not to be overtly
critical or dismissive of the venue’s work, but more to shed more light on
Mary Steven’s vision of the complicated process of accommodating ghosts
and legacies of a colonial past. Specifically, I am interested here about the
extent to which ‘decisions and non-decisions’ made on both a curatorial and
promotional level (as I have highlighted with La Colonie) can play a major
role in how communities with ties to violent legacies are accommodated and
represented. This makes its complicated positionality between the affective
and material economy of the 17th October massacre feel even more acute
but also all the more interesting to observe. Firstly, there is no indication on
the outside of the building or in the environs as to the type of work or events
being carried out in the venue (or, indeed, the presence of the coffee shop
Attia refers to) which arguably sets up an air of exclusivity or secrecy. This

219

‘Re-Appropriating the Colony: An interview with artist Kader Attia about La Colonie in
Paris’, Spike Magazine, 16 January 2017, https://www.spikeartmagazine.com/en/articles/reappropriating-colony (accessed 17 July 2018).

133



sentiment is exacerbated by the venue’s almost exclusive use of social
media to promote events and to sell tickets.220
Secondly, the setup of the space and the cost of a number of the events (and
indeed, Attia’s reference to transport links) suppose a freedom of movement
within space. It is predicated on an unspoken ability to cross Paris to get to
Gare du Nord, the economic means to afford public transport, the capacity to
move freely without pain, or to feel safe in intellectual, academic spaces.
Finally, whilst the venue has hosted an impressive (and diverse) range of
events dedicated to experiences of diasporic or migrant populations in
France, these have been carried out exclusively in French. No provisions for
translators are made available on the website and none of the events on the
venue’s homepage or social media platforms mentions accessible material in
languages widely spoken by migrant or diasporic communities in France
(which include Arabic, Farsi and Urdu).
It is important to stress that La Colonie positions itself at diametric odds to
the elitist dynamic these structures set up. In an interview prior to the
building’s inauguration, Attia spoke of his desire to create
A place where everyone can re-appropriate their own space of
freedom to think and act as they want to. That is also why we don’t
want to invite only academics who work critically on the history of
colonisation, but also feminists, refugees, architects and activists.221

220

Both the web page and the social media accounts for La Colonie have been deactivated
since this research was conducted.
221
Interview between Ellen Davis-Walker and anonymous representative from La Colonie,
17 May 2019 (finalised over email).

134



Attia’s sentiment was echoed directly in one of my own fieldwork interviews
with an anonymous representative from the La Colonie. Over the course of
our conversation, which followed the inauguration of the Discreet Violence
exhibition in July 2018, I was informed that:
La Colonie est un espace dédié à la décolonisation des savoirs. Il a
pour but de créer un pont entre des espaces et des communautés
différentes mais également de jouer un rôle de médiateur et de
sensibilisation autour de thématiques mémorielles, dont notamment
précisément la question du 17 octobre 1961 qui touche
particulièrement les fondateurs de la Colonie, tous Algériens.222
Despite the decisions made about the venue’s promotional strategy and its
complex position on the edge of two very diverse and progressively more
gentrified neighbourhoods, it is important to stress that memorial traces of
this massacre lie at the very heart of its inception. As such La Colonie is,
through the simple process of existing as well as through its varied events
programme, able to create an affective link outwards to clandestine artistic
projects and spatial practices dedicated to the legacies of the 17th October
massacre. In an interview with an anonymous research participant, La
Colonie was described as:
Un pont entre des espaces et des communautés différentes mais
également de jouer un rôle de médiateur et de sensibilisation
autour de thématiques mémorielles, dont notamment précisément
la question du 17 octobre 1961 qui touche particulièrement les
fondateurs de la Colonie, tous Algériens. Le concept de la Colonie
est calqué sur celui développé par Kader Attia dans son œuvre de
réparation: réparation comme acte de couture, de création de liens,
de mise en sépulture, de soins, à l'opposée d'un effacement
chirurgical.223

222

Barclay, p. 20.
Interview between Ellen Davis-Walker and representative from La Colonie, 3 May 2019
(interview conducted via email).

223

135



During an interview with Leopold Lambert (invited to speak at La Colonie to
present on the colonial cartography of Paris as part of the Discreet Violence
exhibition series) he was keen to stress that whilst La Colonie was not
‘activism in a pure sense’ its creative inputs were nonetheless to be
celebrated because:
Artistic representations are very much able to part with this idea of
objectiveness….[which is significant] because to a certain degree
everyone is involved in this event which so much mobilised the
history of French Colonialism.’ 224
Similarly, in an interview with the magazine Socialite Family prior to the
building’s inauguration, Kadia Attia and his partner Zico Selloum spoke of
their desire to use the legacy of the 17th October 1961 as an impetus to
secure ‘la décolonisation des peuples comme celle des savoirs, des
comportements et des pratiques’.225 Attia’s mission statement deliberately
situates the project within what he sees a culture of a noticeable social
fracture within Paris.
He writes that:
Ici comme un peu partout ailleurs, les fractures se démultiplient
dans un silence criant, avec une violence accrue. La Colonie est
une expérience de défragmentation, de démorcellement, de
réparations dans laquelle tout le monde est le bienvenu.226
This process of undoing and de-fragmenting the effects of social fractures
that Attia places at the heart of the venue’s mission brings us back to the
legacy of the 17th October massacre and the violence of its absence and
224

Interview between Ellen Davis-Walker and representative from La Colonie, 3 May 2019
(interview conducted via email).
225
This was on the homepage of the La Colonie, although the web page has now closed.
226
See above.

136



erasure. To examine the extent to which the venue is part of a process of defragmentation and decolonisation and whether it contributes to what Mary
Stevens describes as a ‘peaceful accommodation’ of ghosts and the
complexities of colonial legacies. it is necessary to return to the legacy of the
17th October, and the complex socio-economic realities of the spaces
surrounding the venue. This chapter will go on to explore the ways in which
the massacre and surrounding legacies of France’s colonial history have
been developed by the venue (paying particular attention to Samia Henni’s
‘Discreet Violence’ exhibition). I will then go on to explore Mary Stevens’
vision of a ‘peaceful accommodation’ of ghosts and legacies in closer detail,
examining the extent to which the ‘decisions and non-decisions’ made at the
venue contributes to underlying socio-economic inequalities in the quartiers
surrounding La Colonie.

227

In the final part of this chapter, I will discuss the

extent to which La Colonie’s creative stance (and engagement with colonial
history more broadly) both echoes and contrasts with the decisions made by
the Musée National de L’Histoire de L’Immigration. In doing so, I hope to
shed further light on the difficulties facing institutions in trying to achieve Mary
Stevens’ vision of a peaceful accommodation, whilst also looking at the
lessons that can be learnt about commemorative practices by comparing a
community-led artistic space with a national collection about how to make
space for ‘alternative readings of history’ to emerge.228
IV.

227
228

Commemorating The 17th Of October Massacre At La Colonie

Stevens, p. 246.
Silverman, p. 16.

137



How has the 17th October massacre been embodied within the venue? How
and where are its stories told, and by what actors or cultural practitioners?
Despite Attia’s emphasis on welcome and inclusivity, it is important to state
that the majority of the events related to the 17th October that I have
attended in the past (On June 19th, 20th and 21st 2018 and 17th October
2018) have been predominantly frequented by scholars, academics or
researchers. Whilst these types of scholarly events are undeniably important,
the lack of inclusivity feels striking when compared to the types of public
engagement work done by other creative local projects in neighbouring
quartiers, and across the city as a whole.
However, as with 17.10.61, La Colonie’s conscious undoing and re-scattering
of memory can, and should, be seen both an act of defiance and one of care.
This was particularly evident in the detailed and meticulous structuring of the
space during the screening of Yasmina Audi’s documentary ‘Ici on noie les
Algériens’ (2010). Although no direct reference was made to either 17.10.61
or Leila Sebbar’s 2009 novel La Seine était rouge the room was bathed in
red light from a tinted red overhead projector, each table was adorned with a
red candle, and red fabric hung from the mezzanine.229
This sense of precise attention to detail and use of space was directly
mirrored in the ‘Discreet Violence: L’architecture et la guerre française en

229

The motif of the Seine and the colour red are repeatedly deployed across Sebbar’s text
as unifying motifs that bind together characters’ accounts of the 17th October massacre.
This stylistic choice seemed to be imperceptibly mirrored in the choice of red decor and
accessories on the night of the documentary projection.

138



Algérie’ exhibition.230 To mark the start of the exhibition, Attia and curator
Samia Henni projected images of Algerian protesters and armed police
officers onto the wall at various points in the discussion, which the audience
were invited to view on the floor above to view the main part of the exhibition.
Set against a black backdrop and magnified well beyond their original size,
their visual impact mirrored the multi-sensory, visceral quality of the 17.10.61.
They remained present throughout: a reminder of their absence from so
much of Paris’s material space and cultural imagination. As the main
exhibition panel stated:
L’exposition dévoile les relations intrinsèques entre l’architecture,
les mesures militaires, les politiques coloniales et la production et la
distribution planifiées d’enregistrements visuels.231
This sense of unveiling or ‘dévoilement’ evoked in Henni’s mission statement
was directly reflected in the structure of the exhibition space on the floor
above, serving as a deliberate nod to recent polemic debates surrounding
hijabs and burqinis in public space. Strategic placement of the glass cases
and television screens drew an implicit vertical line between the exhibition
pieces and a window at the far end of the room. From the entrance to the
exhibition, and via the refracted and reflected images documenting traces of
France’s colonial control in Algeria, the visitor’s gaze is drawn to a window at
the far end of the room. At the same time, the spectators’ eyes were drawn to

230

This exhibition was presented by Henni in Zurich, Rotterdam, Berlin and Johannesburg
prior to its inauguration at La Colonie.
231
Taken from the ‘Agenda’ section for ‘Discreet Violence: L’architecture et la guerre
française en Algérie’ on La Colonie’s homepage, https://www.lacolonie.paris (accessed 27
February 2019).

139



headlines documenting the death of thousands of Algerians in internment
camps, mirroring the displacement and refiguring the critical observations on
France and Algeria that framed the introductory round table. The motive of
the Seine and the colour red is repeatedly deployed across Sebbar’s text as
a unifying motif that binds together characters’ accounts of the 17th October
massacre. This stylistic choice seemed to be imperceptibly mirrored in the
choice of red decor and accessories on the night of the documentary
projection.

Figure 11 Exhibit from the Discreet Violence Series, June 2018

The placement of documents and photographs on to walls and material
surfaces in the building were amplified through the creative use of glass and
reflective surfaces. The liquid quality of fragments of building and written text
corresponded with the fluid movement of the footage used in 17.10.61. When
looking down at exhibits such as photographs of groups of Algerian camp

140



inmates, the mirror reflection of the newspaper headlines added an extra
visual layer to the objects on display, demanding a more concentrated
engagement on behalf of the spectator. This visual disruption was further
exacerbated by the sense of continual oscillation between the present-day
Parisian exhibition space and images of colonised Algeria. Henni’s use of six
continually looping television screens, showing early televised recordings
taken in settlement camps or building sites, played a particularly effective role
in distorting any sense of fixed time or place. Through its re-purposing of
space and cultural artefacts, and its seamlessly fluid movements from Paris
to Algeria and back again, this exhibition provided a nuanced creative
response to the absence of state-sanctioned memorials or commemoration
of France’s colonial activity.
At the end of his interview with SPIKE magazine, Kader Attia returned to the
significant tie between art and architecture. Explaining his motivation to
create the space:
In terms of memory, architecture is an archive, and like any other
archive it is “authoritarian” because it excludes what it does not
show and extols what it does show. But this authority has a
vulnerability that art can reveal.232
In an interview prior to the inauguration to his recent exhibition The Museum
Of Emotion (exhibited at the South Bank Centre and the Hayward Gallery
between February-March 2019) Attia invoked a similar interest in
architecture’s capacity to reveal hidden strands of memory and emotion in
city landscapes. The Museum of Emotion brings together a key group of

232

SPIKE Magazine, ‘Re-Appropriating The Colony’.

141



sculptures and theatrically-lit installations that ironically invoke classical
ethnology and natural history museums in order to explore how such places
have historically misrepresented artefacts from non-Western cultures whilst
also presenting fantastical displays of animal life in the West’s former
colonies.
Whilst the ‘authority’ exerted by the physical presence of La Colonie on rue
Lafayette at a significant crossroads between the Goutte d’Or and La
Chappelle cannot be ignored in our appraisal of it, I suggest that its possibility
to open up vulnerability (to expose its own fault lines and a variety of
perspectives) is an important step in creating fair and inclusive ways of being.
Ultimately, as Avery Gordon reminds us, part of the process of social
haunting constitutes forcing a confrontation: ‘forking the future and the
past’.233 It is only when at this meeting point, she suggests, that we might
‘locate a profound and durable practice of thinking and being and acting
toward eliminating the conditions that produce the nastiness in the first
place’.234
By leading us to this meeting point — the contradictory interface between
past and present injustices both in memory and in space — the
memorialisation of the 17th October 1961 massacre, La Colonie opens up
not simply a confrontation but a possibility for dialogue and change. As Avery
Gordon reminds us, to carry out a recognition or reckoning with the spectres
of a maligned past, it is necessary for there to be ‘a kind of sympathetic

233
234

Gordon, p. 200.
Gordon, p. 201.

142



magic between us as analysts and the world we encounter’.235 Through the
exposure of points of contradiction of vulnerability, La Colonie is an example
of the multitude of different modes of production, as well as knowing and
understanding ghosts that can bring about this ‘sympathetic kind of magic’. It
is one of a series of crucial steps in commemorative cultural practice that are
needed in order to create a genuinely equal and diverse memorial responses
to the events of the 17th October 1961 massacre.
V.

La Colonie And The Embourgeoisement Of Paris

When considering the affective economic spectral traces of Kader Attia’s La
Colonie, our analysis cannot be confined to this single story. It demands a
movement out, or back: a conscious return to the material economy of the
space it finds itself in and the neighbourhoods it borders.
It becomes clear when looking at these factors together that whilst La
Colonie has taken to give a platform for cultural recognition of both the
legacies of the 17th October 1961 massacre and other key historical events,
these contradictions have paradoxically, for now at least, failed to take into
account a necessary reckoning with ghosts and their legacies. Although La
Colonie in many ways is an emblematic landmark in or on Paris’s tangible
memory landscape it must reconcile itself with the intangible or undesirable
consequences of its own memory work, and of the practice of cultural
production from which it was born. 236

235

Gordon, p. 201.
Kader Attia’s parents were present on the day of the 17th October massacre and
survived.

236

143



To do so requires us not simply to consider the steps the venue is taking to
memorialise the events of the 17th October, whilst also paying close attention
to how the venue perpetrates what Clerval and Fleury describe as the ‘very
gaps between rich and poor areas of the capital’ which, in turn are leading to
an embourgeoisement or gentrification of the surrounding areas. By looking
at how La Colonie is part of shifting socio-economic currents in the wider
neighbourhood around it, we can start to see how Colin Davis’s vision of the
‘complex relationship between, people, places and things’, as well as
between the power held by certain venues and the people whose stories they
claim to represent, plays out in present-day city space. Whilst this chapter will
go on to look at the work of the MNHI in more detail later on in this chapter, it
is important to unpack precisely what socio-economic factors are at work in
the areas surrounding La Colonie at the time of writing this thesis. As Clerval
and Fleury remind us:
‘We must take seriously the combined effects of the increasingly
insecure status of wage-earners and the segmentation of space
within cities, which have created situations where certain
neighbourhoods primarily accommodate certain types of people,
some neighbourhoods become poorer, and the built environment of
these housing estates declines, often taking living conditions with
it.’237
I argue that It is only by carrying out this dual reckoning with the vestiges of
ghosts and the socio-economic factors that curtail their movements through
certain locations and spaces, that we might come to a more nuanced
understanding of the problematic and often uncomfortable ways that ghosts
are intangibly, at times invisibly, manifested in present-day space. It is only
237

Clerval and Fleury, p. 165.

144



through a re-appraisal of the social networks and geographical locations that
frame how we follow ghosts (and assessing the materiality of the space we
move through in their week) that we might create what Hollis describes as ‘a
new layer in the urban palimpsest.’238
The link between a singular venue and France’s wider colonial narrative
requires us to question the broader relationships between urban space and
Paris’ affective and material haunting economy. Clerval and Fleury observe
that ‘Gentrification possesses a sort of a pioneer fringe that radically
transforms the face of urban landscapes and the material makeup of the
city”.239 When considering material, fixed sites such as buildings that
materially change the way landscapes are perceived, moved across or
through, the question of inclusivity and openness is raised: who is free to
move in these places? As Parry poignantly highlights:
Without moving in a direction where studies of actually existing
political, economic and cultural conditions, from histories that have
happened or are still in the making… postcolonial studies will
remain ensnared in an increasingly repetitive preoccupation with
sign systems and the exegetics of representation.240
Ultimately, our creative responses to the 17th October massacre must also
seek to account for the ways in which space is simultaneously mobilised and
‘weaponised’ to inform the ways passers-by engage with colonial history.
Such an appraisal of this multi-faceted nature of urban space in turn

238

Isabel Hollis-Touré, ‘Algeria in Paris: 50 Years On’, in France since the 1970s: History,
Politics and Memory in an Age of Uncertainty, ed. by Emile Chabal (London: Bloomsbury,
2014), pp. 143-171 (p. 135).
239
Clerval and Fleury, p. 186.
240
Parry, p. 30.

145



demands a direct ‘reckoning with our ghosts’ as well as a conscious
sensitivity to the socio-economic factors that underpin the places they
frequent, and the reckonings they bring about for those they leave behind. It
is only by viewing historical anniversaries, events, spatial geographies and
cultural ventures as tied together, inter-connected and open to the impact of
the other or to acts of violence, which we can work towards sensitive and
nuanced memorial practices in the present, reckoning with the ghosts that
the 17th October massacre still invokes in sites, and places in the skin and
flesh of all those who move through them.
These present-day assumptions (and ‘weaponisation’) of space can be more
clearly illustrated by an understanding of the ways in which haunting affects
them. The ways in which ghosts linger and the ripples of socio-economic
inequality they have left behind, allow us to map the influences of the past on
the present, and to observe how communities with close links to the
massacre are included in and at the venue, and represented in the
collections (or events) it chooses to host. By locating La Colonie’s memorial
work on a broader cultural and geographic cartography, we might come to
understand the steps that are being taken to memorialise colonial crimes,
and the present-day socio-economic factors that keep the living and the dead
in enduring conditions of inequality. In ‘Landscape: From Common Good to
Human Right’, Gordon suggests that landscapes and human rights are linked
together, not only with respect to conflict zones or to native territories, but
also:

146



With respect to everyday landscapes and environments that are
threatened and damaged.” It is, therefore, important to consider
how thinking about “how landscapes can be transformed”, and how
the right to landscapes, even if it is not recognised as a right per se,
is implied in many international right laws.”241
Lambert’s vision of a ‘weaponised spatiality’ or the punitive use and
mobilisation of space must, I suggest, be taken into account in this reading of
postcolonial Paris and the enduring presence of colonial inequalities within
it.242 In addition, the repeated prolongation of the state of emergency, which
was eventually crystallised into common law in November 2017 by the
Macron administration, solicited much contemporary debate about the
disproportionate use of violence towards Franco-Muslim communities, as
well as the uncomfortable assumptions that are being made about French
citizens on the basis of the spaces they frequent or inhabit.
Re-evaluating the relationships between everyday spaces, the ghosts they
contain and the people who have the right to move through them in the
present demands sustained attention. It requires us to re-activate associative
links between different forms of cultural representation, as well as different
locations and phases of recent history, including the Algerian War of
Independence, the January and November 2015 Paris terrorist attacks, and
recent outbreaks of violence in Cannes and Paris in May 2017 and April
2018. As Isabel Hollis suggests:
To return to an event like the Algerian war implies an unravelling of
the intimate and collective processes that function to manipulate
241

Interview between Ellen Davis-Walker and Leopold Lambert, Paris, May 15th 2018.
Amnesty International, ‘France Vos Droits En Danger’, 2016,
https://www.amnesty.org/fr/latest/press-release/2016/02/your-rights-in-jeopardy-globalassault-on-freedoms/ (accessed 14 July 2018).

242

147



memory in order to establish an inclusive historical narrative. This
makes it particularly useful to study anniversaries as key moments
of facture, division and reconciliation.243
Coming to terms with the affective ramifications or literal ghosts of the 17th
October massacre through La Colonie also demands us to turn our focus to
more abstract or figurative ghosts, to paraphrase Freedgood and Schmitt.
Indeed, through its use of the Discreet Violence Mobile Exhibition and an
anniversary screening of Ici On Noie Les Algériens, La Colonie demands a
similar reckoning with social relations and local level politics, as well as the
impact these can have on the process of remembering itself.244 As Tilley
argues, far from being objective accounts of historical crimes,
Monuments are often fundamental to the persistence and direction
of social memory, frames for the inscription and reproduction of
social values. They can also be means of forgetting and reworking
social relations.245
Whilst it is not a monument, La Colonie visually markets itself as a space
which is dedicated to the understanding and unpacking of colonial legacies
and testifying to their enduring presence. Therefore, the extent to which La
Colonie is ‘re-working’ or challenging legacies of inequality feels particularly
prescient in the wake of rapid development and shifting neighbourhood
demographics, thanks to the emergence of cultural or communal spaces
funded by the Paris Municipality. These include, but are not confined to, Parc
de la Villette complex Zénith, the Cité des sciences et le l’industrie, and the
243

Isabel Hollis-Touré, ‘Introduction: Risk-Assessing Charlie Hebdo’, French Cultural
Studies, 27 (2016), 219-22, (p. 222).
244
Taken from the ‘Agenda’ section for ‘Discreet Violence: L’architecture et la guerre
française en Algérie’ on La Colonie’s homepage (accessed 27 February 2019).
245
Michael Rowlands, ‘Monuments and Memorials’, in Michael Rowlands and Christopher
Tilley (eds), Handbook of Material Culture (London: SAGE Publications, 2006), pp. 500-516,
(p. 514).

148



Cité de la musique which came into being over the latter part of the 1990s.
Furthermore, over the course of the 2000s, the Paris Municipality has
converted a large number of abandoned industrial sites into venues ‘devoted
to cultural production and consumption’.246
Behind the laudable objectives of ‘upgrading public space, familiarising
people with contemporary art, or providing a beach for those who could not
go away on holiday’, Chervel reminds us that these cultural artefacts and
operations have contributed to ‘turning the city into a sort of stage set or
backdrop’. 247 They also draw a large number of citizens to quarters hitherto
little frequented except by those living there. The public authorities, by the
same token, have contributed to a ‘change in image and in frequentation of

246

La Colonie is a short walk from the open-access multi-media exhibition space, gallery and
training academy Centre Quatre in the 19th arrondissement, which also reserves a
proportion of its building as office space for start-ups and social enterprises. The project cost
the Paris municipality 102M euros, equivalent 14 to almost a quarter of the budget devoted
to social housing in 2008-2009, and was the largest project in Delanoës first term of office. I
am paraphrasing a section on this matter which can be found in Clerval and Fleury (2012).
247
Chervel develops this hypothesis by drawing on a range of municipality-funded (or
commissioned) cultural initiatives, including ‘Paris Plage’ and the annual ‘Nuit Blanche’ which
takes place on 4th October across the whole of the city. See ‘Paris Plage’
https://en.parisinfo.com/discovering-paris/major-events/paris-plages (accessed 2 February
2023); and ‘Nuit Blanche’, https://en.parisinfo.com/what-to-do-in-paris/info/guides/nuitblanche-in-paris (accessed 22 August 2023). Her paper also cites several quarter-specific
projects from across the north-east (18ème and 19ème arrondissement), including ‘Paris
quartier d’été’, http://www.parislete.fr/ (accessed 22 August 2022) and ‘Cinéma au Clair de
Lune’, https://www.forumdesimages.fr/les-programmes/cinema-au-clair-de-lune_2 (accessed
22 August 2022). However, she does not address many of the ‘association’ backed projects
that take place in the quartiers or municipalities she identifies and that fulfil an almost
identical remit, or produce similar cultural outputs. A notable example left out of this paper is
the Festival Ciné-Voisins hosted by the Fabrique documentaire and the association Zone
Vive that take live outdoor film projections and screenings to a number of locations across
Paris and, crucially, its periphery. See: ‘Ciné-Voisins : les portes du 20e font leur cinéma !’,
https://www.cine-voisins.fr/ (accessed 2 February 2023) for a full program and list of
locations.

149



these former working-class quarters’.248 Cultural outreach productions thus
become synonymous with socio-economic politics of the city.
Although these cultural and social interventions within the city space (and
particularly in the neighbourhoods surrounding La Colonie) are often
implemented at a national level, the idea in fact relies much more directly on
local policies of both the ‘social networks’ evoked by Avery Gordon but also
on individual venues, buildings or quarter-specific initiatives and cultural
programs. 249
In his comprehensive overview in the proliferation of cultural and
neighbourhood-level projects of Grand Paris since the beginning of the
2000s, Ribardière echoes Cherval’s sentiments about the correlation
between ‘commune’ politics and local spatial and cultural initiatives across
the city. He writes:
Comme niveau d’action politique et comme niveau d’organisation
sociale, la commune constitue non seulement un échelon
fondamental d’observation des disparités sociales et territoriales,
mais aussi de reproduction des inégalités.250
As Chervel ultimately notes, what is significant about the geography in which
these commune-level policies are implemented, is how they invariably act as
an accompaniment to gentrification or the exclusion of certain communities
from certain areas and localities. The process, she suggests, begins when:

248

Clerval and Fleury, p. 165.
Gordon, p. 22.
250
Antonine Ribardière, ‘Les territoires populaires du Grand Paris Entre paupérisation,
gentrification et moyennisation’, MétroPolitiques, 18 February 2019, https://www.unionhabitat.org/centre-de-ressources/habitants-politiques-sociales/les-territoires-populaires-dugrand-paris-entre (accessed 5 May 2019).
249

150



‘The working-class Parisian quarters taken over by the middle and upper
classes are those that have had the benefit of the largest numbers of
creations of green areas, ‘green quarters’, and new sporting and cultural
facilities’.251 However, as Anne Louise Milne has recently argued in a
specially commissioned spatial edition of Francospheres, it appears that the
most ‘excluded populations do not benefit from these policies’ .252
Despite the Mairie de Paris’ apparent emphasis on inclusive quartier projects
designed to promote tolerance or vivre-ensemble, initiatives mean that
neighbourhood residents are not at liberty to enjoy its benefits. Milne
poignantly argues that the communities referred to in the project descriptions
in reality:
No longer have the means to remain in the neighbourhood and can
hardly make themselves heard in the public space. The pursuit of
the objective of social mix relies on the desire to push the problem
— that is, poor households — a bit further away, without worrying
about the devastating effects on these families, who do not have
access to the social housing created in the more affluent
neighbourhoods.253
It is important to stress that the presence of La Colonie alone is not
(necessarily) objective evidence of gentrification, nor a directly contributing
factor to socio-economic shifts in the surrounding quartier. Its presence
however cannot be divorced from this wider spatial context. Although La

251

Cherval, p. 56.
The aim of the issue was to build on research carried out through the Plural CulturesPlural Spaces project that was to accompany the ICI’s development into two new buildings,
both of which were to include a mosque and spaces for educational and cultural activities.
See: Anna-Louise Milne, ‘Plural Cultures and Spatial Politics: Situating the Institut des
Cultures d’Islam in the postcolonial landscape of Paris: Editor’s Introduction’, Francosphères,
7 (2018), 141–46 (p. 144).
253
Milne, p. 146.
252

151



Colonie is arguably ‘much more a space of ideas and intellectual approach
rather than activist organisation’ it is also a fundamental reminder that human
right landscapes and human rights are linked together ‘with respect to
everyday landscapes and environments that are threatened and
damaged’.254 Whilst la Colonie has been celebrated for its excellent
‘propensity to create debates, ask questions, examine histories’ and is a vital
step in commemorating events such as the 17th October 1961, we must
consider where it sits in relation to other ’spatial strategies of creating,
critiquing and problematizing the postcolonial city”’.255 It is therefore crucial to
ask how it perpetrates enduring systems of spatial inequality whilst at the
same time giving space to the cultural production needed in order to
challenge it.
As Avery Gordon reminds us, the stories that we tell about absent people or
places tied up to violent chapters in history should not only seek to ‘repair
representational mistakes’ but must also ‘strive to understand the conditions
under which a memory was produced in the first place, towards a counter
memory for the future’.256 In order to consider where, and how, La Colonie
sits in Avery Gordon’s vision of both a reparatory and constructive ghost
story it is necessary to follow other ghosts in other directions. To do so, I will
now go on to compare La Colonie with a more centralised, institutional
response to France’s colonial legacies, and explore what this ‘dynamic

254

Laura Menatti, ‘Landscape: From Common Good to Human Right’, International Journal
of the Commons, 11 (2017), 641–83, (p. 643).
255
Interview between Ellen Davis-Walker and Leopold Lambert, 14 August 2018.
256
Gordon, p. 22.

152



transfer of memory’ from community lead initiatives to larger scale
commemorative projects can teach us about the process of “accommodating
postcolonial ghosts” (to quote Mary Stevens) and the alternate versions of
257

history they offer up.
VI.

Repairing Representational Mistakes: From La Colonie To The MNHI

The role of cultural and creative practice in bringing about a reckoning with
both a material ‘haunted’ economy and the haunting quality of the affective
can be clearly illustrated through the Musée National de l’Histoire de
L’Immigration (MNHI) dedicated to documenting the legacies of immigration
to France, with a particular emphasis on the experience of immigrants from
France’s former colonies.

257

Stevens, p. 246.

153



Figure 12 Inside of the MNHI with a view over the galerie des dons, June
2018, (Photo: Author’s Own]

As with Kader Attia’s La Colonie, the MNHI’s inscription of colonial memory
into the Parisian urban landscape and its complicated relationship to
France’s colonial past prior to the re-inauguration of the building in 2007,
once again demands a more complex reckoning with historical and
geographical materiality of the space where it finds itself.
I follow on from Patrick Crowley who argues that
this visibly colonial site has come to be partly invested by migrant
and postcolonial memories that provoke tensions across the
political spectrum. The Palais is a distinctly colonial realm of

154



memory that seeps into the surrounding area, but within it lies a site
of memory which, despite a lack of funding and political will,
produces a jarring juxtaposition of texts and signs that haunt
258
France’s present.
Through its location at this confusing site of colonial power and postcolonial,
la Colonie exposes the complex process of commemorating historical
legacies from former capitals of colonial power. As Mary Stevens has argued,
Le Palais de la Porte Dorée was, initially ‘conceived as a vehicle for colonial
propaganda and remains inseparable from it’.259 Located close to the
periphery on the edge of the 12th arrondissement, the building was the former
site of the 1931 Colonial Exhibition.260 All three sides are covered in a
modernist portico by sculptor Alfred Janniot, celebrating what Dominique
Jarrassé has described as ‘the economic contributions of the colonies to
France’ in which ‘the realities of forced labour are masked by a seductive
harmony and plastic beauty of the bodies’.261

258

Patrick Crowley, ‘Musée National de l’Histoire de l’Immigration’, in Postcolonial Realms of
Memory: Sites and Symbols in Modern France ed. by Etienne Achille, Charles Forsdick and
Lydie Moudileno (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2020), pp. 204–14, (p. 206).
259
Stevens, p. 246.
260
It is important to state that the MNHI addresses this directly on its website with the
following mission statement: ‘L’Établissement public du Palais de la Porte Dorée propose
dans son offre de visite un parcours d’interprétation de l’histoire du Palais de la Porte Dorée
qui permet de mieux comprendre l’histoire de ce monument unique, témoignage
emblématique du style art déco mais également de l’histoire coloniale et de l’immigration en
France. Le parcours vise à donner les clés de lecture et de contextualisation de l’idéologie
coloniale déclinée sur les fresques, les bas-reliefs et dans les salons. Il propose également
des éléments de compréhension et d’appréciation historique, architecturale et artistique du
bâtiment. Enfin, le parcours analyse l’articulation entre le Palais de la Porte et la création du
Musée national de l'histoire de l'immigration. Il constitue, en ce sens, une possible étape
préalable à la visite de l’exposition permanente du Musée national de l’histoire de
l’immigration.’ I shall return to specific points in this statement in this chapter.
261
Dominique Jarrassé, ‘The former Palace of the Colonies: The Burden of Heritage’,
Museum International, 59 (2007), 56–65 (p. 58).

155



Figure 13 Frescos from the MNHI. Photo credits: Elsie Dent, La Fabrique
Documentaire <http://lafabriquedocumentaire.fr/auteur/elsie-dent/>

This material marking of colonised bodies into the foundations of the building
creates an uncomfortable juxtaposition between the internal exhibits and
external façade, as well as between the museum’s internal contents and the
foundation on which the collections externally repose. Indeed, Jarrassé goes
on to suggest that the presence of the museum in France’s contemporary
landscape has subsequently emerged as nothing more substantive than a:
Euphemistic appellation…named for its address rather than its
content, in which postcolonial realities emerge as a radical and
comprehensive break with the colonial past rather than the working
through in a metropolitan context of the colonial legacy.262
The museum’s emphasis on archiving and collecting testimony to shine
a light on the subjective lived realities of historical immigration to France
offers a new perspective on Stevens’ vision of the metropolitan context of

262

Jarrassé, p. 59.

156



colonial legacy. As Delaplace argues, ‘Le processus de patrimonialisation
permet ainsi de sauvegarder la mémoire de l’immigration et renforce son
caractère pérenne par la création d’une collection et d’un musée’263 and
stands as an important example of what Isabel Hollis has described as ‘the
extensive re-imaging of France’s cultural heritage’ between 2004 and 2011.
Building on from Thomas, Hollis draws particular attention to the 2007
inauguration of the Cité Nationale de l’Histoire de l’Immigration. Hollis
suggests that on one level the Porte Dorée, despite its significant contribution
in working through its own and France’s ties to colonial history actually
serves to ‘accentuate an absence for which it can never fully compensate’.264
Dominic Thomas echoes these sentiments, suggesting, ultimately, that the
Palais de la Porte Dorée was a missed opportunity to ‘inscribe the
experience of immigration as a chapter in a broader and more pertinent
history that would have included slavery, colonialism, and the postcolonial
era’.265
For all of the problematic affective and memorial associations that are
activated by the presence of the museum on the site of the former colonial
exhibition centre whose expositions promoted an idea of La Grande France

263

Andréa Delaplace, ‘Un palais pour les immigrés? Le Musée de l’histoire de l’immigration
à Paris: une collection et un musée en devenir’, Les Cahiers de l’ecole du Louvre, 7 (2015)
89–99 (p. 90).
264
‘namely the lack of a museum that would really take on the necessary but unenviable task
of dissecting France’s colonial past.” I suggests that these claims directly echo calls made in
the Felwine-Sarr report, The problem arises when the museum no longer becomes the site
for the affirmation of national identity, but, as Benoît de L’Estoile indicates, is seen rather as
a museum of the Others; when the museum conserves objects procured from somewhere
else and assumes the right to speak about these Others (or in the name of the Others) and
claims to declare the truth concerning them.
265
Thomas (2013).

157



and its prowess abroad, I want to pause to consider the agency and the
reckoning that is nonetheless enabled through the curation of the collections
themselves. In her discussion on commemorative events that preceded the
50th anniversary of the Algerian war of independence, Hollis discusses how
an ‘appropriation of crucial French sites of memory’ is needed ‘as
monuments to alternative narratives of the past’. A proliferation of new
monuments, she suggests, will lead to ‘a more open and crucial narrative of
French imperialism and decolonisation will find its place in French history’. 266

Figure 14 Photo of one of the core mission values of the Musée National de
L’Histoire de l’Immigration . [Photo Author’s Own]

266

Hollis, ‘Algeria in Paris: 50 years on’, p. 45.

158



The necessity of addressing representational nuances and mistakes in both
established museums and new sites of memory has been thrown into
sharper relief by recent debates surrounding the return of stolen colonial
artefacts to formerly colonized countries, as well as the removal of
figureheads of colonial power from public plinths and landmarks around the
city. Whilst Emmanuel Macron’s recent (and heavily publicised) commitment
to returning stolen artefacts does on some level mark a movement ‘towards a
counter memory for the future’ 267 it is important to note that these
commitments have yet to be honoured and like with the Africa Museum in
Belgium, many stolen ceremonial items and statues remain exhibited in
French national collections. Whilst the MNHI is not part of this ongoing
debate, the commemorative gaps that still remain within its collections, as
well as its failure to address the problematic dimensions of other national
museum collections that work alongside it, is a reminder of what Frith and
Scott have referred to as the “multidimensional nature of reparations and
reparatory actions”.268

267

President Emmanuel Macron pledged to give back some of the 90,000 objects from subSaharan Africa that are in France’s national collections, mostly in the Quai Branly Museum in
Paris. See: AFP, ‘Art Africain: Macron va rendre 26 œuvres au Bénin’, Libération, 23
November 2018, https://www.liberation.fr/france/2018/11/23/art-africain-macron-va-rendre26-oeuvres-au-benin_1693958 (accessed 30 May 2019). Arguably, Macron’s gesture does
initially seem to be aligned with much of Gordon’s conception of social reckoning; that is, ‘a
matter of finding a route, access to that which is marginalized, trivialized, denied,
disqualified, taxed and aggrieved and a matter of redistributing respect, authority and the
right to representability’; Gordon, p. 203.
268
Nicola Frith and Joyce Hope Scott, ‘National and International Perspectives on
Movements for Reparations’, The Journal of African American History, 103 (2018), 1–18 (p.
1). It is important to stress that Nicola Frith and Joyce Hope Scott are assessing ‘the struggle
for reparations for the enslavement of African, Indian, Malagasy, and other indigenous
peoples’ rather than specific political gestures carried out by Emmanuel Macron.

159



Although the museum’s location on the site of the former colonial exhibition
leaves it with a series of complicated memorial questions to navigate,
perhaps one of the most original concepts developed at the MNHI is that of
the allocation of a space to a ‘galerie des dons’ through a symbolic
acknowledgment of Marcel Maus’s influential work on the ‘gift’.269 The MNHI
encourages individuals and families to share with the general public personal
symbols of their respective migratory experience, thereby further
foregrounding the human and personal dimension. As Fabrice Grognet
remarks:
Les objets qui n'étaient jusque-là que des souvenirs de familles,
des papiers d'identités, des contrats de travail périmés, des
archives personnelles ou d'institutions viennent grossir les rangs
des objets "témoins" de l'immigration en France sur les étagères.

270

Consequently, he argues that: ‘Ce regroupement artificiel d'objets de natures
et de provenances différentes trouve alors une unité en devenant collection
nationale’.
Through its direct deferral to what Claire Eldridge has described as the
‘authority and the legitimacy to speak on behalf of the past ‘the galerie de
dons stands out as a poignant example of the steps that can be taken as part
of a process of ‘redistributing respect, authority and the right to

269

This concept is explored more thoroughly in Marcel Mauss, The Gift: Forms and
Functions of Exchange in Archaic Societies (London: Cohen & West, 1966) and is
referenced in the information panels featured at the beginning of the exhibition and in the
secondary material available for visitors in the museum.
270
Fabrice Grognet, ‘Quand “l’étranger” devient patrimoine français. Les collections
ethnographiques à inventer du musée de la CNHI’, Hommes et Migrations 167 (2017), 28–
37 (p. 30).

160



representability’ in France’s memory landscape.271 Its strength undoubtedly
lies in its ability to pay attention to individual stories and to the subjectivity
that remains absent from many sanctioned state narratives and
commemorative gestures dedicated to the history of immigration.
Ultimately, in order to fully address France’s complicity in colonial crimes
overseas and within its own borders we must, as Avery Gordon demands,
‘strive to understand the conditions under which a memory was produced in
the first place’.272 Whilst, on some levels, I am looking at two different
approaches that cannot be folded together in the sense that one is state-led
and the other citizen-led, by looking at the very distinct memory work put into
place by the MNHI and La Colonie, we witness a radical possibility for the
creation of innovative new cultural memory practices that can combine the
best of both. Whilst any ‘reckoning with’ cannot, and must not, be divorced
from the historical and present-day socio-economic realties of the locations
they occupy, it is only by re-positioning models of commemoration and
encouraging a dialogue with grassroots commemorative models, that we may
catch a glimpse of the sorts of radical models of resistance needed for a
social reckoning with the spectral, to allow them to be recognised and
attended to.
VII.

From Commemorative Practice to Ghostly Reckoning

271

Claire Eldridge, From Empire to Exile: History and Memory within the Pied-Noir and Harki
Communities, 1962–2012 (Manchester University Press, 2016), p. 305.
272
Gordon, p. 130.

161



If ‘France’s ghosts are produced by socio-historical factors’, then the
associative links between waves of exclusion, of movement from banlieue to
centre and back (to paraphrase Isabelle McNeill) require us to turn to the
restless movement of ghosts and their relationship to urban space, and how
their presence in present-day Paris serves as a constant reminder of both an
affective and material haunting economy. 273
The socio-economic decline identified in the OPV 2018–2019 report provides
an interesting point to return to here274. Over the 2017–2018 economic year,
unemployment rates had generally risen compared to the same figures
published in 2017 and current youth employment rates or ‘insertion
professionnelle’ remains consistently higher than previous generations. The
explanation for this disparity between the politics of local neighbourhood
space and national trends provides an interesting point of reflection.
According to the report ‘Les processus de changement prennent donc du
temps mais semblent porter leurs fruits, en se combinant les uns aux autres,
par des politiques initiées nationalement et adaptées localement’. This
emphasis on the local implementation of national political agendas — and the
potential pitfalls presented by the reckoning with France’s complex
postcolonial landscape — brings us back, once again, to ghosts

.

Through my analysis of Kader Attia’s La Colonie I have shed some light on
the complex relationship between the venue’s creative commemorative

273

Isabelle McNeill, Memory and the Moving Image: French Film in the Digital Era
(Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2010), p. 34.
274
OPV, Rapport 2018, (p. 10).

162



practices and what Anne Clerval and Antoine Fleury have dubbed the
‘embourgeoisement de Paris’ or the progressive gentrification of the
neighbourhood around it. Through my comparisons with collections in the
Centre National de L’histoire de L’Immigration (where Attia’s work is also
exhibited), I have also exposed how the memories of the 17th October 1961
have evolved since the 2011 appearance of the 17.10.61 webdoc, and how
they continue to be filtered by (or tied up with) forces of social and spatial
injustice in the city. This chapter has also drawn closely on Thomas’s
thoughts surrounding the unresolved presence of ghosts, or the specific ways
that the spectre of French colonial history perniciously ‘continues to haunt the
national psyche, inserting itself into concerns pertaining to diversity and
multiculturalism, identity, education, religious tolerance, and of course
immigration policy’.275 These observations, I suggest, serve to further
highlight the importance of confronting this colonial legacy, ‘in order to
achieve a more comprehensive understanding of French society today’.276Yet
with this necessary appraisal of the haunting economy, the way that spaces
are both haunted and haunting, we must still be open to the affective
dimensions of space, to be still with spectres and the spaces where they
linger.
Whilst the affective qualities of absence might often bring about restless
repetitive movements in the place where the dead were once present and
living, the imposed immobility tied up with socio-economic realities of certain
275

Dominic Thomas, Africa and France: Postcolonial Cultures, Migration, and Racism
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2013), p. 12.
276
Thomas, p. 12.

163



spaces demands a stillness in order to be fully present in a reckoning. This
chapter is a reminder how both the presence of ghosts, and the curatorial
and structural decisions made by institutions that try to accommodate their
legacy, cannot help but open up further questions about socio-economic
inequalities in the spaces in which they are set. It also demonstrates the
ways that affective spectral traces in cities are tied up in broader national
memorial and curatorial decisions that dictate which crimes are
commemorated in certain spaces, or are represented in museum or gallery
collections.
Moreover, the dual consideration of Paris’ material and affective economy
that I have given space to in this chapter signals the need for a creation of
spaces for stories to be told and the willingness to account for the
sometimes-uncomfortable social reckoning this brings about.
To confront the spectres of France’s colonial past demands a similar stillness
in a place of fear and discomfort, a willingness to be present in that
frightening place ‘where you wish you were not’.277 It ultimately demands a
reckoning with the realities of space, and the way postcolonial subjects are
transformed into ‘living’ ghosts through the spaces they inhabit and the way
they stir up the frightening or the fearful, the material or physical
manifestations of lost people and places. Ultimately, in order to gain a fuller
understanding of the interaction between memory and present-day lived

277

Thomas, p. 12.

164



experience we are required to draw on the material and the intangible, the
fear and the stillness, that co-exist within any given space.
This stance feels particularly relevant in the context of France’s colonial past
and the 17th October 1961 massacre whose legacy is stretched between a
singular state-sanctioned plaque on the one hand, and the grassroot or
community-level cultural productions on the other. By understanding where
each of these artefacts sits on a neighbourhood or national level, by exposing
the porous connections, inconsistencies, and sometimes problematic
secondary impact of these reputations we might come to extend our
reckoning with ghosts beyond what ‘we know’ (to follow on from Avery
Gordon) to a process of ‘putting a life back in where only a vague memory or
bare trace was visible to those who bothered to look’.278 Unlike the MNHI,
and despite the at times conflicting decisions that have affected the building’s
accessibility, La Colonie provides a tangible example of what community-run,
artistically driven and altogether more creative spaces that seek to tap into
the memory traces of forgotten legacies can look like, revealing the possibility
for innovate readings of forgotten history to emerge in their wake. Whilst, as
both La Colonie and the MNHI ultimately remind us, a tension with external
state-perpetrated colonial amnesia or broader dynamics of socio-economic
inequality inevitably permeate into some aspects of the creative practice, by
providing a space of ‘accommodation’, to paraphrase Mary Stevens, where
historical legacies are represented through artistic practices that centre

278

Gordon, p. 201.

165



overlooked perspectives, La Colonie is able to open up new possibilities for
innovative remembering outside the parameters of state-sanctioned silence.
This sense of operating outside of the remit of the state’s representation, and
centering perspectives of communities whose own experience stood in direct
opposition to this narrative, became a key thread of my research into La
Colonie, and in my consideration of their cultural-outreach program more
generally. In one of our discussions regarding the memorial function of the
space, our conversation repeatedly came back to the localised efforts
needed to secure the recognition of the 17th October 1961 massacre in
Parisian public space. As my interview participant commented:
Pour moi, la bataille se joue sur le terrain de la reconnaissance
politique, d'une part, qui implique un rapport de force et sur le
terrain judiciaire de l'autre. Le travail de la Colonie se situe du côté
de la visibilisation, de la sensibilisation, de la réintroduction d'une
possible révolte constructive. Savoir c'est déjà se défendre. 279
Part of the battle to secure a recognition for the events of the 1961 massacre,
according to the interview participant I met during the 2018 17th October
massacre commemoration, is not simply the process of publicly
memorialising the past but rather of moving outwards, and of creating ‘Les
moyens de partage de ces connaissances en mettant en place un travail
d'archivage de long terme’.280
Whilst this democratisation of memories and events is, as I have previously
suggested, hindered by the venue’s exclusivity, the steps towards creating an

279
280

Anonymous interview participant from La Colonie, Paris, June 2018.
La Colonie, www.lacolonie.fr.

166



accessible (visible) memory archive of colonial history must be seized and
actively carried forward. With 1 billion euro generated to restore Notre Dame
within two days of the inferno from a range of private and public donors, the
questions surrounding representation (and legitimacy) in France’s cultural
landscape feel all the more prescient.281 The question of which landmarks
are endowed with symbolic national significance (and funds) feels particularly
significant in the wake of the Europe-wide moves to remove statues of slave
owners or figureheads of colonial violence from public space. This
significance feels ever more loaded in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic
which has seen thousands of vulnerable residents forced into temporary
insecure accommodation without the likelihood of being able to access a
permanent home. Since 2017, budget limitations have been cited as a key
factor preventing 140,000 Parisians from accessing social housing in the city,
282

and in and around the 18th and 19th arrondissement.

Ultimately, both the MNHI and La Colonie can be viewed as emblematic of
just some of the problematic pitfalls facing those of us who try to follow
ghosts. They are a reminder of Patrick Crowley’s vision in relation to the
MNHI of ‘memory that seeps into the surrounding area’ but that ‘produces a

281

€200 million (£174 million) was pledged by the cosmetics multinational L’Oréal, which
followed a similar donation from the LVMH luxury goods group run by Bernard Arnault.
François-Henri Pinault and oil company Total have also pledged €100 million (£87 million)
each. See: Another Man, ‘The Owners of Dior and Balenciaga Pledge €300 Million for NotreDame’, 16 April 2019, https://www.anothermanmag.com/style-grooming/10789/the-ownersof-dior-and-balenciaga-pledge-300-million-for-notre-dame (accessed 29 May 2019).
282
LRI Conseil de Paris, ‘La politique du logement à Paris, 1ère responsable de la fuite des
Parisiens’, 1 January 2019, https://groupelri.paris/2019/01/09/la-politique-du-logement-aparis-1ere-responsable-de-la-fuite-des-parisiens/ (accessed 10 May 2019).

167



283

jarring juxtaposition of texts and signs that haunt France’s present.’

Through its ongoing and ever-shifting contact between the living and the
dead, La Colonie provides us with a vantage point to observe how power
dynamics in individual neighbourhoods and on national cultural agenda play
out, how it ultimately transforms certain (arbitrarily) designated living subjects
into ghosts, and how it replicates the unequal power dynamics that haunted
the dead when they were living. Its response to these enduring socioeconomic conditions is imperfect, at times problematic, yet at the same time
underpinned by a desire to open up questions that for decades were
consigned to silence, and to provide a space for artistic and creative
expression.
If we are ever to assess the pitfalls that inhibit progress across France’s
postcolonial landscape, I suggest that both La Colonie and the MNHI are a
reminder that we need to look at the quartiers and buildings where legacies
of colonial history are housed, as well as the social (or political) networks that
determine which stories get to be told, in what locations and (most crucially)
by whom. As Avery Gordon, leading on from Brogan, reminds us, in coming
to a social reckoning with the past, our responses must bring about a degree
of self-reflection, a questioning of how we are in these stories, with how they
change us, with our own ghosts, and how these social relationships spill into
the physical landscapes we occupy and move through.

283

Crowley, p. 204.

168



When discussing the presence and memorial work of La Colonie on rue La
Fayette I evoked Menatti’s assertion of the link between urban landscapes
and human rights. Our understanding of the inequalities inherent to material
or urban landscapes, she writes, needs to take into account the injustices
that might occur in “everyday landscapes and environments that are
threatened and damaged”.284 Part of this reckoning with the present-day
socio-economic exclusion and its close ties to colonial power dynamics is a
reminder of the republic’s desires to contain certain subjects in certain
spaces and locations based on assumptions about a supposed identity, or on
the shifting socio-economic politics of the spaces that they might find
themselves.
Following ghosts, according to Avery Gordon, is about: ‘Integrating lost
portions of the past into a national narrative and bringing to a form of
presence the absence of the dead’.285 Ultimately, he suggests, even when
bodies and stories have been lost, ‘the haunting is re-cast in terms which no
longer overshadow the present, but become part of it’. Through its desire to
provide a home and an environment in which the long-maligned ghosts can
inhabit, La Colonie is a reminder of the creative responses necessary to reframe approaches to colonial history. It is a reminder of Avery Gordon’s
invocation of a problematic social reckoning, one which seeps into skin and
the self, and that invokes uncomfortable confrontations with lived realities of
that self and our reckoning with the hidden and the spectral.

284
285

Menatti, p. 15.
Gordon, p. 205.

169



Moving closer to the figurative and subjective presence of ghosts in
landscapes demands a sensitivity to these shifting sands, and the opening up
of a confusing mix of affective and inherited traces left in their wake. Indeed,
despite the enduring material and affective haunting economy that its
interrogations of the 17th October 1961 massacre expose, La Colonie’s part
in the ‘shifting semiotic play’ surrounding France’s colonial past opens up
new possibilities to connect with material and affective ghosts. In this sense it
is an essential step if France is truly to address a reckoning with its ghosts, to
make space for the living and the dead to be exposed to each other in
contradictory and often-painful ways; to breathe life into space and the traces
they contain. It carries an echo of Colin Davis’s call to be open to the
possibilities of being open to the spectral and the possibilities for ‘unknowing’
that they present, to listen to the old wisdom of the ghosts whose stories call
out to us, demanding recognition and truth.

170



Chapter 3: Moving Beyond Molenbeek: Re-tracing Belgium’s
Transnational Trajectories with the Collectif Mémoire Coloniale)
Cruel duel celui qui oppose Paris névrose et Bruxelles abrutie, et
qui se dit que bientôt ce sera fini’
286
(Dick Annegarn)
On a peine à s'imaginer que tout est perdu/ puisque l'énergie des
cendres est toujours là et souffle de temps en temps/ à travers les
décombres.
287
(Aime Césaire)
I.

The Collectif Mémoire Coloniale: Re-engaging with Brussels’ Public
Space

At the start of my introduction, I outlined my belief in a need for a more
nuanced spatial reading of Paris and Brussels, and for a consideration of the
ways in which both cities are, in many ways, shaped by distinct and very
subjective postcolonial legacies across Francophone Postcolonial Studies.
To understand the haunting at work in each city, I suggest that it is important
to be aware of the different ‘dynamic transfers’ at work, as well as the way
that present-day spaces are tied up in respective colonial histories and
postcolonial realities such as Paris and Brussels. What happens, then, when
two cities are united by the spectre of global terrorist violence, or when
historical contexts of both cities become merged in popular imagination, and
what lessons about the relationship between postcolonial legacies,

286

Dick Annegarn, ‘Bruxelles‘ (1972), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rYdk70VSfv8
(accessed 20 January 2022).
287
Aime Césaire ‘Lenteur’, https://www.poemes.co/lenteur.html (accessed 20 January 2022).

171



overlooked memories and present-day city space can emerge as a result of
further engagement?
Following the shootings at the Jewish Museum (2014), suicide bombs in
Zaventem Airport and at Maelbeek station (2016), and in the aftermath of the
November 2015 attacks in Paris, the city of Brussels found itself propelled to
the forefront of international media attention. As the city reeled from two
lethal explosions in a metro carriage and in the arrivals lounge of its mostfrequented airport, Brussels-based journalist Laurent Dubois encouraged
readers to consider ‘What is Brussels?’ He suggested that the images taken
at the scenes of the attacks evoked ‘A city in transit, a crowded metro and a
bustling airport, banal sites of everyday movement - now turned into spaces
of death’.288 Dubois argued that the images diffused in the aftermath of the
attacks were striking, not only in their depiction of such senseless violence,
but also because in many ways ‘Brussels is much less legible and familiar
than Paris. We learn of fragments of its geography - an immigrant
neighbourhood called Molenbeek and a downtown subway station called
Maelbeek - but what connects them?’289
I open this chapter with a return to Dubois’s question, asking how structured
walking tours hosted by the activist group Collectif Mémoire Coloniale are
providing new engagement with Brussels’ public space, and as such

288

Laurent Dubois, ‘What Is Brussels?’, The Slate, 23 March 2016,
http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/foreigners/2016/03/how_brussels_is_differe
nt_than_paris_the_history_of_a_diverse_city.html?via=gdpr-consent (accessed 01 August
2018).
289
Dubois, ‘What Is Brussels?’.

172



encouraging engagements with what Silverman describes as the ‘alternate
readings of history’ that can be offered up through memory traces dispersed
around locations with ties to colonial history.290 Since its inception in 2015,
the Collectif Mémoire Coloniale has positioned itself as an active player in the
move to transform engagements with (and understanding of) Brussels’ public
space, hosting a wide range of talks, workshops, walking tours and debates.
The group is a consciously intersectional, Pan-African association,
comprising several longer-standing grassroots groups and charities active in
291, 292

Brussels, as well as Wallonie and Flandres more broadly.

The group’s

events are predominantly promoted through its Facebook page, which has
4,636 followers, as well as a growing Instagram following.293
The Collectif’s choice to underline the ongoing colonial connections between
Belgium and its former colonies invites reflection on the haunting quality of
Belgium’s colonial legacies, as well as Michael Rothberg’s vision of ‘the
dynamic transfers’ of memory between different places and periods of history
that I outlined in my introduction.294 This chapter will suggest that the
Collectif’s call for decolonisation of space and marks an important step in
moving beyond Molenbeek, and re-tracing the transnational trajectories that
continue to disperse active traces between Brussels and its former colonies,
290

Silverman, p. 15.
The group recently established a separate ‘cellule afrofeminine’.
292
These include Binabi (Étudiants afro-descendants de l’ULB), Cec de Louvain-la-Neuve
(Étudiants congolais de l’UCL), Bana Mboka Asbl, Change Asbl, Ligue Panafricaine Umoja,
ONG Coopération Éducation Culture (CEC), Mouvement contre le Racisme, l’Antisémitisme,
Centre interfédéral pour l’égalité des Chances, Musée Royal de l’Afrique Centrale.
293
My own understanding of Pan-Africanism is built on Rita Kiki Edozie’s definition of PanAfricanism, see earlier footnote 38.
294
Rothberg, p. 24.
291

173



and which link different phases of colonial history to the present-day city
space.
By bringing to light these ‘intersecting transnational trajectories’ so central to
any engagement with the present-day realities of the public sphere, we can
come to understand how patterns of movement and vestiges of former
colonial powers are worked into city space and are thus able to transform it in
the present. 295 As such, The Collectif’s walking tours become an extension
of Chamoiseau’s vision of memory traces or an alternative re-writing of
different versions of history: an active reminder of how ‘L’histoire s’inscrit
partout dans le paysage urbain Bruxellois…à travers les monuments, les
noms des rues, les statues’.296
Moreover, I will argue that, by displacing our engagement with Brussels
beyond the haunting and highly mediatised trope of the Molenbeek district,
the tours are part of a necessary expansion of the terms of Dubois’ question,
and part of a response to it. By bringing tourists and members of the public
back to over-looked sites across the city, the Collectif situates the guided
walking tours as a means to help re-map overlooked, hidden spectral
presences back into the urban landscape. Using literature and promotional
materials gathered from the group’s social media, website and conference
literature (as well as my own photographs, observations from visits and semistructured interviews with group members), this chapter will examine how the

295

Arens, p. 150.
See Collectif Mémoire Coloniale, https://www.memoirecoloniale.be (accessed 01 June
2022).

296

174



‘decolonial’ walking tours proposed by the Collectif Mémoire Coloniale can
help to paint a more accurate picture of the geo-political realities of presentday Brussels, whilst helping to address the complete absence of colonial
history in the current walking tour landscape in the city.
This chapter will outline all of the ‘parcours’ that the Collectif offers to
members of the public, including routes in Palais Royal, Etterbeek,
Cinquantenaire, the ULB and Scharbeek before ending with a closer
engagement with its ongoing (recent) work in the quartier de Matonge,
historically hailed as Brussel’s ‘Quartier Africain’, and the home to the newlyinaugurated Place Patrice Lumumba which was opened to the public on the
30th of June 2018. In doing so, I will suggest that The Collectif’s past
interventions, and ongoing campaigns for recognition of Belgium’s colonial
past, can help us come to a closer, more nuanced understanding of the
transnational trajectories and hidden memory traces at work in Brussels, and
the way these highlight the enduring haunting quality of colonial power in city
space. By actively displacing critical focus beyond traditional tourist
monuments and routes, these cultural interventions mark a vital step in reframing visions of postcolonial Brussels that has proven how engagement
movements through space (and political movements centred on the politics of
space) can achieve the official recognition needed for colonial history to be
brought firmly back into public debate.
The first half of this chapter will aim to give an overview of the haunting
presence of Molenbeek and explain the need (and means by which) this
needs to be offset with a more nuanced understanding of the politics of the

175



city space. The second half of my exploration will then directly follow on the
heels of the Collectif Mémoire Coloniale’s (walking) work in the
neighbourhood of Matonge, examining the stories and hidden voices it brings
to light, before considering its implications for shaping the future of Belgian
(and Francophone?) Postcolonial Studies.
II.

Returning to Molenbeek

Before I go on to examine the particularities of the Collectif Mémoire
Coloniale’s walking tours in Matonge, it is important to introduce and
contextualise both the quartiers of Molenbeek and Matonge and to outline
why I believe the image of Molenbeek has taken on a haunting quality in
popular cultural imagination, and why it is important to offset this.
Positioned at the very edge of Brussels’ city centre with its enduring tributes
to Leopold II, Matonge is framed by the municipality of Ixelles in the south,
and the exclusivity of the Avenue Louise shopping street in the west.
Although its outskirts can be identified as the triangle defined by Chaussée
de Wavre, Chaussée d’Ixelles and the Rue de la Paix, its long-standing
history of transnational migration — coupled with its reputation as ‘le quartier
African’ within Brussels — means that its borders are continuously
transposed and expanded outwards, incorporating a diverse population and a
wide range of businesses, shops and restaurants. Sarah Demart captures
something of this undulating, contradictory character in her reflections on
Matonge, where she writes:
Aux côtés des ngandas et restaurants, on y trouve aussi des
magasins de pagnes, de chaussures, de sacs, de perruques ou de

176



tissages. Les salons de coiffure pour hommes, femmes ou enfants,
sont pléthores, de même que les call shops, les cybercafés et les
bijouteries.297

Figure 15 A close up of Matonge. Soure AfrikMali http://afrikamatonge.overblog.com/article-5510510.html [Last Accessed: 02/02/2020]

Molenbeek-Saint-Jean, by contrast, is a commune comprising two distinct
parts, covering a territory of 5.9 square kilometres in total. Following attacks
in both capitals, the episodes of violence in Paris and Brussels were read as
a tale of two cities, whose narrative outlines and spatial coordinates return,
time and again, to Molenbeek. It is the point from which the key perpetrators
of the Bataclan shootings, Abdelhamid Abaaoud and Salah Abdeslam,
planned the stages of their attacks, and to which Abdeslam was to return in
the days following the shootings, evading police capture by escaping over the
rooftops. 298

297

Author’s own fieldnotes, Brussels, 20th October 2018.
See: ‘How captured Paris attacks suspect Abdeslam hid in Molenbeek’, Reuters, 26
March 2016, https://www.cnbc.com/2016/03/19/captured-paris-attacks-suspect-abdeslamhid-in-belgiums-molenbeek.html (accessed 30 July 2018).

298

177



Whilst it might seem easy to chalk up claims that a 2.27-mile-wide commune
is the current ‘European Jihadi Capital’ to nothing more than lazy journalism,
it is important to be attentive as readers, researchers and consumers of
media to the narrow representation of Molenbeek and the selective
mediatisation of Brussels.299 By framing our engagements with Brussels in
such reductive terms, and by concentrating so much of our focus to a strip of
land in a corner of the city, the pervasive influence of the intolerant politics
projected on to Molenbeek can, and will, unconsciously feed into our
engagements with the city unless sustained efforts are made to look, and
think, anew.300
Both quartiers are, in different ways, synonymous of simplistic readings of
different layers of history, and tangible examples of multi-directional memory
between different places (be it the area in Kinshasa after which the quartier is
named, to the suburbs of Paris from which the El Brakouai brothers left to
carry out the attacks at Brussels airport). By looking at them together and
considering how the Collectif’s organised walking tours are contributing to a
more nuanced reading of the different layers of disavowed histories (and
legacies of inequalities) in Matonge, it is possible to gain a deeper
understanding of the ways in which memory traces are ‘dynamically

299

See: Carol Matlack, ‘Brussels: Europe’s Jihadi Capital’, Bloomberg Business, 26 March
2016, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-03-24/brussels-europe-s-jihadi-capital
(accessed 31 July 2018); and Gabriela Galind, ‘Molnbeek mayor to sue British journalist for
defamation’, Politico, 17 June 2018, https://www.politico.eu/article/katie-hopkins-molenbeekto-sue-fox-news-reporter-for-calumny/ (accessed 31 July 2018).
300
T.D. ‘La chaîne Fox News présente Molenbeek comme “la capitale européenne du
djihad”’, BX1, 13 May 2018, https://bx1.be/news/chaine-fox-news-presente-molenbeekcapitale-europeenne-djihad/ (accessed 31 July 2018).

178



transferred’ from and between different neighbourhoods to sites of former
colonial power, and across global waves of terrorism carried out by the socalled Islamic State.
This amalgamation of stories, or preconceptions about the form a story
should take, is one of the reasons that the city resists any easy answer to
Dubois’s questions, both at the time of the attacks and in the years after.
Even in the light of heavily mediatised removal of statues across Belgium as
a result of the global Black Lives Matter movement, one of the first
automated suggestion when googling the word Brussels is ‘attack’ with
21,300,000 hits, whilst ‘Molenbeek’ generates over 350,000 results with the
words ‘ghetto’, ‘terrorism’, ‘Islam’ listed as the top four auto-generated hits. I
suggest that this fact alone is arguably indicative of the paradox of presentday Brussels, which continues to be read in monolithic terms, despite
representing so many different things to different people. Francoise Vergès
warns against the danger of these sorts of reductive, or condensed, readings
of violent history, suggesting that:
The potential immobilization of history into a "knot" of fixed relations
is real. The way in which memories perform a role in our lives is
connected to the questions we raise at a certain moment, and the
connection can be explained through a constellation of causes.301
Indeed, this constellation of cultural and ethnic causes that circumscribe our
engagement with postcolonial Brussels is precisely what renders it
‘unfinished and imperfect’ which gives it a need to be returned to and

301

Françoise Vergès, ‘Wandering Souls and Returning Ghosts: Writing the History of the
Dispossessed’, Yale French Studies, 118/119 (2010), 137–50, (p. 140).

179



unpacked in the light of re-directed attention on the city, as statues are torn
down and questions about how best to commemorate colonial history
become the topic of popular and academic debate.302
In Open City, Teju Cole’s fictional protagonist Julius roams the streets of
Brussels obsessively, in a hapless search for his maternal grandmother. He
describes it as ‘a city of monuments…obdurate reminders to uncomfortable
questions’.303 The discomfort of interposing questions so central to Julius’s
confused walking, feeds into some of my own thinking, and reading, of the
city. It is this often contradictory and precisely ‘unfinished’ nature of
postcolonial Brussels that has lead Charles Forsdick, Sarah Demart, Sarah
Arens, and me to call for a more ’nuanced understanding of Francophone
Postcolonial Studies’ which consciously takes into account the particularity of
the Belgian geo-political context, and can help to frame Belgium’s reckoning
with its own past, as compulsory lessons on colonial history are introduced
into the Belgian secondary school curriculum.304
To do so requires applying a different model that is attentive to the country’s
long-standing history of transnational migration from its former colonies and
beyond that I outlined in the introduction to this thesis, as well as the spatial
and political impact this continues to have on present-day city space,
demanding new forms of resistance to colonial inequality. If we are to

302

Du Bois, p. 24.
Teju Cole, Open City : A novel (New York : Random House, 2011), p. 12.
304
Charles Forsdick and David Murphy, ‘Introduction: Situating Francophone Postcolonial
Thought’, in Postcolonial Thought in the French Speaking World, Postcolonialism across the
Disciplines (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2009), p. 13.
303

180



account for enduring the ‘plural, multi-directional nature of colonial memory’
in the city that De Boehme and de Mul point to, then we must displace our
attention beyond the burnt and paint-stained statues, and beyond the
boundaries of Molenbeek. Doing so requires an active engagement with
cultural and creative manifestations that are casting new light on the
‘intersecting transnational trajectories’ between Belgium and its former
colonies, as well as their links to different periods of violence, and different
landmarks and locations across the city.305
III.

Moving Beyond Molenbeek: Re-Defining Postcolonial Brussels

To move beyond the pervasive presence of Molenbeek in popular
imagination, it is important to first consider how the ‘plural, multi-directional
nature of colonial memory’ is experienced in Brussels, and in which specific
locations or localities. This need for a consciously nuanced engagement with
the particularities of the city’s space and postcolonial politics is important
when we consider Goddeeris’ assertion that Brussels has a ‘Very one-sided
way of dealing with its colonial past in its public space’, a stance that has
been exposed (and will need to be re-evaluated) as the country navigates the
fallout from the dismantling of effigies of Léopold II, and honours its
commitment to elevating postcolonial perspectives in school history
lessons.306

305

Goddeeris, ‘Colonial Streets and Statues’, p. 397.
Idesbald Goddeeris, ‘Postcolonial Belgium. The memory of the Congo’, Interventions:
International Journal of Postcolonial Studies, 17 (2015), 434–51, (p. 434)

306

181



Stephen Frosh suggests that one way we can creatively re-write or re-define
our perception of postcolonial history in the present is by ‘“stretching forward”
towards the horizon of what cannot be seen with ordinary clarity yet’.307 To
stretch toward and beyond a horizon requires a particular kind of perception
where ‘the transparent and the shadowy confront each other, and where the
intermingling of fact, fiction, and desire shapes us and the public knowledge
we create’.308 This stretching forward — that is to say, the process of
incorporating postcolonial pasts and presents into urban and cultural
landscapes — demands a confrontation of the shadowy or the spectral. I
align both with what Cixous dubs as society’s ‘imaginary zone’ that hides
everything it wishes to keep invisible, and unspeakable.309 Frosh’s emphasis
on a transitive verb of motion is interesting here, as it exemplifies the active
and subjective dimension to recognising colonial pasts. To stretch or step
requires intent, personal implication and a dimension of bodily vulnerability.
Part of the difficulty of facing nebulous or culturally maligned histories is the
surge of subjective connection that comes with confronting violence or the
legacies of colonial trauma. It is therefore important to give space to cultural
models that facilitate these sorts of subjective connections to history. This
chapter will build on this need, by exploring how the deeply personal act of
walking — and the consciously ‘decolonial’ walking tours hosted by the
Collectif Mémoire Coloniale in Brussels — can help us reconnect with this

307

Frosh, p. 2.
Frosh, p. 2.
309
Hélène Cixous, Le Rire de la Méduse et autres ironies (Paris: Editions Gallimard, 2006),
p. 67.
308

182



lived dimension to space, opening up ‘contact’ sites to cast new light on
postcolonial pasts.
As Rebecca Solnit argues, ‘When walking one occupies the space between
[those] interiors in the same way one occupies those interiors. One lives in
the whole world rather than in interiors built up against it.’310 By embodying
Solnit’s expansive vision of walking, I argue that The Collectif’s walking tours
and programs can tap into the affective traces of memory through their bodily
implications. Walking becomes significant both through the degree of
vulnerability it solicits in the walker’s body as they move through internal and
external spaces, and through the way it interrupts narratives designed to
keep certain memories of historical legacies at bay. Through this process and
the active (re) dispersal of multi-directional memories across Brussels, these
spatially focused, community-led tours allow us to move beyond Molenbeek,
both physically and figuratively, and allow for a more nuanced re-framing of
the spatial politics of present-day postcolonial Brussels. They also give us
clear examples of the cultural steps needed to engage with the challenging
landscape of postcolonial Brussels: one still haunted by vestiges of colonial
history even as symbols of it are, latterly, being removed. Against this
backdrop of very rapid social change, it is even more vital that the legacies of
colonialism and the transnational connection between Belgium and the DRC
it has engendered, are contextualised in public space, worked through and
understood. Indeed, the Collectif Mémoire Coloniale has pointed on repeated
occasions to the lack of clear information about Belgium’s colonial history in
310

Solnit, Wanderlust, p. 34.

183



the public sphere throughout the course of my time spent shadowing their
events. During one walking tour in March 2017, Kalvin Soirresse asked us:
Pouvez-vous trouver à Bruxelles un panneau directionnel ou
descriptif devant un monument ou une infrastructure touristique qui
fait référence à la colonisation ? Il y en a très peu au regard de la
longueur de cette histoire qui dura près d’un siècle. Savez-vous
pourquoi la statue de Léopold II est tournée vers la banque ING ?
Pourquoi le roi n’a-t-il jamais mis les pieds au Congo et où était
situé le quartier général du pouvoir colonial ? Peu de gens le savent
car une véritable politique de déni a été menée en vue d’effacer les
traces de cette histoire aussi bien dans l’espace public que dans les
têtes.311
Whilst this statement pre-dated (and could not have necessarily predicted)
the resurgence of the Black Lives Matter movement in the summer of 2020,
the removal of statues of Leopold II has only sought to highlight the many
years’ worth of state-endorsed silence surrounding Belgium’s colonial past.
As the material landscape of the city starts to change (and as the process of
removing colonial statues hopefully gathers more traction) there will be an
even greater need to bring to light historically forgotten transnational tales of
violence. Bringing these hidden stories to light is a vital if we wish to gain a
more complete picture of how the city was constituted, and how its legacies
will be carried forward into a new era of confronting (or removing) colonial
legacies. The transnational trajectories and memory trails that imperceptibly
tie present-day Brussels’ public space to its former colonies and to large
swathes of North and Sub-Saharan Africa must be teased out and clearly
articulated to allow the city to move beyond a culture of colonial amnesia,

311

Kalvin Njall Soiresse, ‘L’espace public Belge, révélateur du déni colonial’, 18 July 2017,
Politico, https://www.revuepolitique.be/lespace-public-belge-revelateur-du-deni-colonial/
(accessed 22 August 2022).

184



and the intense mediatisation of minority populations in Molenbeek, towards
a vision of the city space that embraces a plurality of spaces.
IV.

Walking Tours with the Collectif Mémoire Coloniale
Nos visites guidées sont un instrument de décolonisation, qui vise à
transformer la société dans une perspective culturelle. On ne fait
pas que parler de l’architecture des bâtiments…on parle aussi de
l’idéologie qu’il y a derrière, on parle aussi de ce que ça signifie
d’un point de vue sociétal, d’un point de vue politique, et d’un point
de vue citoyen. 312

Through their consciously localised intervention and creative focus, the
Collectif’s walking tours offer a tangible example of Baragard’s vision of
‘contact sites’: instances where legacies and stories can be actively engaged
with and re-worked through city space. Francoise Vergès suggests that these
sorts of contacts of, and with, colonial memory allow us to appreciate ‘how
actors instrumentalize or create memories, but also how memory has
become an active source of references for re-articulating the present’.313
Through their emphasis on active movement, be it through the process of
walking or through events, seminars or workshops that refer back to the sites
and landmarks encountered on these tours, present-day spatial politics
becomes actively transformed through the footsteps of new generations and
the re-insertion of formerly maligned history into the spaces in which it
originally took place. This active transformation, which is contingent on
walking, movement and acquired knowledge, is crucial in moving beyond
DuBois’s vision of a fragmented city: ‘an immigrant neighbourhood called

312
313

Author’s own fieldnotes, Brussels, 20th October 2018.
Vergès, ‘Wandering Souls’, p. 136.

185



Molenbeek and a downtown subway station called Maelbeek’.314 Through
this contact between memory and active movements through the city, the
Collectif’s walking tours reveal not simply the obvious difference of Maelbeek
(a quartier with associative ties to the origins of terrorist violence and one still
scarred by the bombs detonated by its perpetrators) but also the layered
histories of violence that surpass Belgium’s territorial borders, exposing a
myriad of connections beyond.
Describing the political function of the quartier-specific walking tour format,
representatives from the Collectif were quick to underline this active
educative function (‘Le but est déconstruire la propagande coloniale qui
est encore bien présente dans l'esprit des citoyens belges.’). We see this
specifically in the group’s tour in Cinquantenaire, which, in stark contrast to
the Top 10 Brussels attractions and Culture Trip Tour, focuses on
L’intervention des militaires belges et des mercenaires de
différentes origines engagés par le roi pour conquérir des territoires
de royaumes établis à l’époque sur le territoire de la République
Démocratique du Congo actuelle.
Similarly, the newly-updated April 2018 tour in Etterbeek seeks to actively
highlight the link between the ‘atrocités et massacres divers’ that were
committed by Belgian authorities in their former colonies, and the presentday quartier ‘qui arbore des noms de rue à leur honneur’.315 The Collectif’s

314

Dubois, ‘What Is Brussels?’.
Examples in Etterbeek alone include: the Rue Charles Tombeur de Tabora, a former
administrative general in Katanga in present-day Kinshasa; Rue Major Pétillon, named after
Major Léo Pétillon who served as Governor-General of the Belgian Congo (1952–58) and,
briefly, as Minister of the Belgian Congo and Ruanda-Urundi (1958); Rue Alphonse Van
Gele, named after one of the leading generals in the 1882 occupation of the Congo by the
Belgian army. Other slightly vaguer, but arguably no less disturbing, street names include
Rue des Pères Blancs, Rue de l’Orient, Rue des Cultivateurs and Place des Acacias.

315

186



decision to highlight the particularities of Etterbeek’s postcolonial
connections, and ongoing links to colonial violence are significant when we
consider the fact that it is bordered by the now infamous Malbeek, connected
by the Avenue de Malbeek in the west. This decision to give space and
critical attention to the particularities of a space overshadowed by the
heavily-mediatised waves of recent violence in its neighbouring quartier,
once again highlights the Collectif’s commitment to transforming perceptions
of present-day Brussels and unveiling hidden histories within it.
V.

From Molenbeek to Matonge: Broadening Postcolonial Horizons

Since its conception in 2015, the Collectif Mémoire Coloniale has used its
interventions, including walking tours, seminars and discussions in the
quartier of Matonge, to highlight a broader campaign for spatial and social
justice (which included, among other demands, securing a square for
assassinated Congolese president Patrice Lumumba). Whilst I will go on to
discuss this square and its inauguration in greater detail in a subsequent
chapter, it is important to outline the wider significance of Matonge in
Brussels’s ongoing postcolonial landscape: to continue to circumscribe its
geopolitical outline a little longer before beginning a more detailed exploration
of (and in) it.
The Collectif’s interventions in Matonge allow for its diverse intersecting
transnational trajectories (and layers of migratory history) to be re-engaged

187



with through the format of the walking tour.316 On the Collectif’s homepage
the neighbourhood is described as a container of:
Plusieurs vestiges de la colonisation [qui] proviennent de plusieurs
périodes différentes de la colonisation. Cette visite a la particularité
de comporter le lien entre la période coloniale et les premières
vagues migratoires congolaises et africaines installées dans ce
quartier.317
The Collectif’s illusion to the migratory quality (and history of) Matonge feeds
into much of its cultural representation. In the opening to his album Hotel
Impala, self-described ‘Ex Congo Belge, ex Zaïre’ rapper and spoken word
artist Baloji evokes images of Matonge imagined from Kinshasa:
J’viendrai chez vous dès que mes papiers seront fixés
T-shirt à l’effigie de Lumumba et leur faire oublier le Che
J’rêve de jouer au Lotto, boire de cette bière
Visiter votre Matongé, chaussée d’Ixelles.318
Baloji’s images of movement between the DRC and Belgium, as well as his
use of ‘votre’ Matonge, says much of the quartier’s inherently cross-border
history, and of its ongoing ties to colonial history that that the Collectif’s
interventions seek to shed light on. When I attended my first visit to Matonge
on a CMC tour in May 2017, our tour leader (Kalvin Soiresse) was quick to
dispel popular preconceptions about the neighbourhood, whilst also
dedicating time to addressing its transnational past. He informed us that

316

The historical significance of Matonge is also explored by the association Kuumba, whose
headquarters were located in the quarter until 2016 and who also host monthly walking tours
in French and Dutch.
317
Collectif Mémoire Coloniale, homepage.
318
Baloji, Hôtel Impala, 2007, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ReUslcog-U4 (accessed
01 June 2022).

188



Matonge c'est d’abord un quartier de Kinshasa, ce sont les
étudiants congolais qui l’avaient baptisé. On appelle ce quartier ‘le
quartier africain’, mais il y a seulement 2 ou 3% d’Africains le
quartier à cause de la gentrification et les loyers élevés. Il y a
beaucoup de Français qui habitent dans le quartier pour éviter les
impôts…on espère avec l'élection de Macron qu’ils vont rentrer
chez eux ! On ne parle jamais des jeunes blancs des quartiers
aisés qui viennent s’installer ici. C’est l’association avec l’Afrique
qui fait venir l’argent dans le quartier, car il y a les touristes qui
viennent.
This conscious decision to highlight the shifting demographic of Matonge
(and the increasingly monolithic racial makeup) is an important one, in the
light of what were widely dubbed the ‘North African’ riots in the winter of
2011-2012, as well as ‘Congolese’ demonstrations in 2005: a reputation, as
Demart argues, that has come to haunt the quartier’s reputation.319 As
Demart rightly identifies, the racial and racist undercurrents that emerged
from these reports, clearly highlight the social invisibility of the Congolese
and more generally black people in Belgium, and provide a key for
understanding the genesis of postcolonial riots in Brussels and how their
origins are also tied to ‘Multiple, criss-crossing histories of violence in the
capital of the former Belgium coloniser’.320 Swyngedouwa, leading on from
319

Sarah Demart, ‘Riots in Matonge and… The Indifference of Public Authority?’, trans. by
Gail Ann Fagen, Brussels Studies, 68 (2013), 1–15 (p. 5).
320
These riots took place in the winter of 2011 in Brussels. The demonstrations took the form
of demands submitted to the Belgian government following remarks by a Socialist Senator
who, on her return from an observation mission in the DRC, affirmed that the election process
was going about correctly. After this announcement, on 4 December the militants, some
holding Belgian citizenship, gathered before the Senator’s party headquarters, demanding an
explanation, but were barred from entering. They refused to leave, but were chased away by
police water cannons. They then decided to move the demonstration to the DRC Embassy,
only to find the street there blocked by patrol cars. Angry, they returned to Matonge and on
the way they shattered car windows and overturned rubbish bins. There were also skirmishes
with local businesses who would not let the demonstrators throw their tables and chairs. When
they reached Matonge and the chaussée d’Ixelles, they began to chanting slogans and
singing, in a demonstrators-police face-off. Around 6:30 pm the situation worsened as the
group moved towards the chaussée de Wavre. Calm was restored around 10pm after shop
windows were shattered, cars damaged and about 30 people arrested. The next day the
demonstrators arranged via SMS and social media to meet at 2pm at the exit of the Porte de

189



Demart suggests that Matonge’s strong symbolic significance lies in that fact
that it offers up a view of ‘glocalised’ urban life, one that suggests that
identities are continuously ‘refashioned, disassembled and reassembled’ in
response to socio-economic and historical pressures. By taking care to
articulate the complexities of these pressures through the frame of the
walking tour, the Collectif is able to effectively side-step the quartier’s
racialised reputation and allow for a more organic and informed image of the
area to emerge.
Indeed, the criss-crossing movement, and the diverse and oscillating nature
of Demart’s description of the quartier in the opening of her article, is
mirrored in the structure of the walking tour. Members of the tour group are
lead between key landmarks such as the former Conservatoire Coloniale in
the rue Prince Albert 1er where a number of colonial artefacts are still stocked
and the Pharmacie Coloniale that sold products from the colonies and
symbolic cultural meeting points, including the cinema the Café de l’Horloge
and the Mural at Porte de Namur. Visitors move between these points
without any sense of a fixed itinerary beforehand; we are not told where we
are going next or why. Winding through the back streets, moving behind
phone shops, wig shops and restaurants that Demart so poignantly
describes, our attention is only demanded at specific points.

Namur metro. Due to the journalists’ late arrival, it was not possible to report on and record a
violence that can be considered as the turning point for the outcome of later demonstrations.
See: Demart, ‘Riots in Matonge’.

190



Figure 16 Kalvin Soiresse Nijal outside the Conservatoire royal de Bruxelles,
reproduced with permission.

The first stop on the Matonge tour takes us to what is now a present-day
Conservatoire Royal de Bruxelles, also known as the École supérieure des
Arts de la Fédération Wallonie-Bruxelles, founded in 1832 as an initiative of
the roi Albert Premier and used to showcase many artefacts and trophies
taken from the DRC. Visitors are informed that inside there are still ‘des
poignets des portes en forme de masques coloniale’ as well as a number of
portraits dedicated to key figures in the colonising missions in the presentDRC by the Belgian army.321

321

See: Conservatoire royal de Bruxelles, http://www.conservatoire.be/ (accessed 1 June
2021).

191



Turning to face tour members, leaning against the graffiti covered wall next to
the delivery entrance to the conservatoire, Kalvin Soiresse informed our
group:
La colonisation c'est comme une valise, vous venez avec une
mitraillette, vous m'arrachez la valise, vous me donnez votre valise,
mais vous ne me donnez pas le code pour l'ouvrir. Aujourd’hui, en
Belgique, les jeunes issus des familles immigrées, ou de la
colonisation toute courte, n’ont toujours pas les codes qu’il faut pour
accéder à l’élite de la société belge.322
This point on the tour is a reminder of the emblems and traces of
colonialisation that are both visible and invisible, that remain simultaneously
noticeable and hidden from the public sphere. In aligning the images of the
colonial masks and door handles hidden on the inside of the musical
conservatoire building, with the social codes to the societal suitcase that are
still denied to certain members of Belgian society, we are reminded not
simply of the ‘intersection of colonial legacies, global migration and the state
in twenty-first century’ but also of how the memory trails and traces in
postcolonial Brussels oscillate between the visible and the invisible, the
accessible and the closed-off. 323 By describing objects and tropes to
members of the public, whilst reminding them that they will not be able to
access or see them, this part of the tour is able to re-inscribe politics of
exclusion spatially and figuratively into the landmarks engaged with on the
tour. This in turn directly reinforces Soja’s assertion that ‘Space can be made
to hide consequences from us, how relations of power and discipline are

322

Author’s own fieldnotes, Brussels, 20 October 2018.
Bill Ashcroft, Gareth Griffiths and Helen Tiffin, The Empire Writes Back: Theory and
Practice in Postcolonial Literature (London: Routledge, 1989), p. 34.

323

192



inscribed into the apparently innocent spatiality of social life’.324 Visitors are
able to literally and critically engage with how the everyday geographies of
the Brussels public sphere become ‘filled with politics and ideologies’.325 It is
a reminder that our aim within the field of postcolonial scholarship must be to
move towards a more inclusive awareness of the ‘plural, multi-directional
nature of colonial memory in contemporary francophone societies’, whilst
simultaneously ‘bringing to light known patterns of prejudice and inequalities
inherent to experience of space’.326
This first point on the tour therefore serves as a poignant reminder of the
need to move away from theorisations of postcolonial spatial theory to
examine the ways in which it is spatially and materially embodied in the
public sphere. It also gives us a clear indication that the work the Collectif is
doing is to redirect public attention back to the memory trails and traces at
work in the city. In teasing out the etymological and geographical links
between Brussels and Kinshasa, this point of the tour is a direct reminder of
the ongoing links between Belgium and its former colonies, and of the
transnational trajectories that are inherent to any engagements with the
Belgian public sphere. This point of the tour also gives us a lived, tangible
reminder of Demart’s vision of Matonge as a space that can help us
understand the ideologies and tensions at work within Brussels.

324

Soja, Political Organisation of Space, p. 13.
Soja, Political Organisation of Space, p. 13.
326
Ruba Salih, ‘Transnational Public Spheres from “Above” and from “below”: Feminist
Networks across the Middle East and Europe’, Anthropology of the Middle East, 5 (2010),
53-70, (p. 55).
325

193



The entry into the centre of Matonge by the Café de l’Horloge (a former
meeting point for colonial officers and then later for Congolese students) now
re-named L'Horloge du Sud and situated just off the Rue du Trone marks the
midpoint of the Collectif’s two-hour tour. As Soiresse was quick to underline,
it is an interesting point to consider the ways in which colonial power
dynamics have endured but also been subverted. This point in the tour also
becomes a point to consider the nature of the journey through the quartier
more broadly. The Café de L’Horloge is a reminder of Forsdick’s assertion
that it is vital to:
Destabilise the term ‘travel’ itself, to question the logic of what it has
come to mean. He writes that “substantial numbers of people
around the globe travel each day and provide evidence enough of
the continued significance of travel as an important culturally
shaping phenomenon.327
In the context of the Matonge tour, the process of walking through the city
space reveals both the power dynamics at work in space and its permeability,
and its potential for collective assimilation and domination. In revealing
Matonge as a site of both spatial and socio-political complexity (known for its
linkages to Africa, but transformed by broader economic and political forces
that are changing the demographic of its inhabitants), the tour does not
simply destabilise assumptions about the quartier’s ‘radical’ and racialised
nature (to paraphrase Demart), but also reveals how space can be made to
hide the consequences of colonial violence, creating what Soja describes as
an “innocent spatiality of social life”.328

327
328

Forsdick and Murphy, p. 13.
Soja, Third Space, p. 13.

194



Leading on from the Café, the tour stops briefly at the Pharmacie Coloniale
on the Chausée de Wavre at the axis with Chausée D’Ixelles, which sold
plants and products brought back from colonial missions.329 Passing by the
celebrated Cinéma Vendôme in a parallel side street, tour participants are
lead down the Chaussée de Wavre to its junction with Rue Longue Vie,
where they are directed to stop opposite a statue of a child soldier made
entirely from salvaged bullet cases from the DRC, a commissioned piece
created by Congolese artist Freddy Tsimba in 2007.

329

Soja, ‘Third Space’, p. 13.

195



Figure 17 Photograph of Freddy Tsimba's Au Delà de l'Espoir (2007).
Photographed in Matonge, in May 2017 [Photo Author’s Own]

At the inauguration of the statue on 9 October 2007, Mairie d’Ixelles, Pierre
Lardot commented that ‘Planté sur la chaussée de Wavre traversant
Matonge, ce statue doit marquer l’ancrage de ce quartier à la réalité
congolaise’.330 Following the removal of the famous fresco by Congolese

330

Jeannot Ne Nzau, ‘Congo-Kinshasa: “Au-delà de l'espoir” de Freddy Tsimba érigée à
Matonge à Bruxelles’, All Africa, 9 October 2007,
https://fr.allafrica.com/stories/200710090631.html (accessed 8 August 2018).

196



Artist Chéri Samba in the same year for reparations, the commissioning of
the statue by the Mairie d’Ixelles was seen as an important step in
recognising the ongoing presence of the Congo in Brussels, as well as the
impact this violence has on Matonge and Brussels more widely. As Soiresse
informed our group:
C’est pour que les gens réfléchissent à ce que le Congo vit
actuellement. Vous voyez, il y a une mère qui porte un enfant
soldat. Au Congo, on sait très bien qu’il y a un système capitaliste
d'exploitation qui date de Léopold ; sans le Congo il n’y aurait pas
de smartphones et [de] caméras et [de] PCs. Si la guerre s'arrête,
vos smartphones seront à 3000 euros, Apple etc. ont intérêt à que
ça continue: les soldats vendent les ressources, l'argent des
multinationales vient de la mutilation et de la traumatisation de la
population pour libérer les terres. Cette statue est donc une statue
de sensibilisation: là on est au-delà de l'espoir. 331

Figure 18 Close up of the gilded plate on Freddy Tsimba's Au dela de
l'Espoir. [Photo Author’s Own]

331

Interview with Ellen Davis-Walker and Kalvin Soiresse, Brussels, 15 March 2018.

197



By highlighting the present-day manifestation of Belgium’s colonial activities
and investments in the DRC, the tour is able to ‘draw attention to the dynamic
transfers that take place between diverse places and times during the act of
remembrance’.332 As Bal reminds us, ‘[t]he need for integrating traumatising
events forms the understanding of cultural memory.’333 In setting up the
affective and figurative bridge between memories of violence and atrocities in
the Congo and the everyday space of Brussels, the statue refutes Goddeeris’
vision of the one-sided historical narrative of Belgian colonisation, allowing
for new memories and perspectives to ‘take up space’.
Swyngedouwa’s kaleidoscopic vision of Matonge as a plethora of sights and
sounds forms the basis of Bragard’s central thesis in Towards a
Neerlandaphone Postcolonial Studies. In her depiction of the quartier she
suggests that its acts a mediatory space in which it is possible to redefine
relations between Congo and Belgium as well as the public and political
sphere. In Matonge, she suggests
It is possible to create [a] contact site where Belgians, Congolese
and Belgo-Congolese people and memories are brought together,
and where new meanings can be imaginatively created.334
Leading on from this vision of Matonge, I argue that the immersive walking
tour format put forward by the Collectif is just one of the necessarily creative
and innovative engagements with space that we need to be thinking about to

332

Rothberg, Sanyal and Silverman, p. 11.
Mieke Bal, Acts of Memory. Cultural Recall in the Present (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1998), p. 10.
334
Véronique Bragard, ‘“Indépendance!”: The Belgo-Congolese Dispute in the Tervuren
Museum’, Human Architecture: Journal of the Sociology of Self-Knowledge, 9 (2011), 93104, (p. 102).
333

198



re-frame relationships between Belgium and its former colonies. As such, the
potential of this format far exceeds Matonge’s disputed borders and the onesided representations of Belgium’s postcolonial past. It offers an insight to the
types of cultural models that will be necessary to accompany Belgium’s
collective working though of its colonial past, and to supplement the state’s
commitment to place colonial legacies on school curricula. Those of us within
the field of Modern Languages should be attentive to its potential to bring
about active re-engagements with disavowed legacies both within our field as
well as in specific city spaces and see it as signal for the sort of site-specific,
community-led initiatives that need to be brought to the forefront of our
discipline, to address representational and analytical imbalances within our
field.
VI.

Matonge, Malbeek, Molenbeek: Walking Tours and the future of
decolonisation

Towards the end of his debut album, Hotel Impala (a mixture of rap and
spoken word poems performed in French and Lingala) the Belgo-Congolese
artist Bajoli maps out his journey between Kinshasa and Brussels. Describing
his experience of moving through the streets of the Belgian capital, in a piece
entitled Liège-Bruxelles-Gand (Point de chute-Capital(e), he writes:
L’histoire est masquée comme à Tervuren
La haine gagne les accords de Schengen
De Boniface à Schuman, ça pue l’amiante
Les parlementaires font des tournantes

199



Dans ce pays succursale
Même pour la Flandre, BX est capitale.335
Bajoli’s return to Brussels as a capital — his evocation of its prominence in
Dutch-speaking territories such as Flanders — seems to echo much of
Dubois’s thinking in the aftermath of the attacks. Both writers find themselves
consumed by the fragments of its geography, drawn back in different ways to
answer the question ‘What is Brussels?’. Bajoli’s invocation of the instability
surrounding freedom of movement and the Schengen agreement reflects
many of the concerns that dominated (predominantly Molenbeek-focused)
media engagement with Brussels between 2015 and 2016. Yet in opening
with a reference to the ‘masked history’ present within the city, Bajoli taps
into the ‘uncomfortable questions’ that seeped into Julius’s meanderings in
Open City, and which the Collectif Mémoire Coloniale, too, is seeking to shed
light on through its structured walking tours across Ixelles, Cinquanterie,
Etterbeek and Matonge.
When I asked an anonymous Collectif representative what they considered
the main purpose of the walking tours, particularly in light of securing a Place
Patrice Lumumba, they reminded me of the group’s primary goal to
deconstruct the continued existence of colonial propaganda
(par ces visites nous expliquons le chapitre de la colonisation sans
édulcorants, sans excuses/arguments qui légitimeraient le système
colonial comme nous avons l'habitude de l'entendre).336

335

Bajoli, ‘Liège-Bruxelles-Gand (Point de chute-Capital(e)-Perdu dans la traduction)’, in
‘Hotel Impala’ (Brussels: EMI, 2007).
336
Author’s own fieldnotes, Brussels, 20th October 2018.

200



The emphasis on the ongoing, active nature of the decolonisation process
says much of the Collectif’s commitment to expanding its cultural outreach
work, and of the necessarily spatial role that these engagements have to
take; it is a reminder of how certain legacies of violence are excluded from,
and denied expression in, public space, and how much of the engagement
with present-day Brussels continues to be dominated by the haunting
shadow of terrorist violence and the spectre of the quartier of Molenbeek.
On 22nd March 2018, the second anniversary of the airport and metro
bombings, numerous streets, landmarks and public spaces across Brussels
were mobilised for a day of public mourning. Interestingly, members of the
public gathered at the Schumann Memorial, between Rue de la Loi, the
337

Schuman roundabout and at a fountain on the Avenue de la Joyeuse

.

Hundreds stood in front of the message board in Maelbeek metro station, in
front of the Olivier de Benoit van Innis in Maelbeek, at the Place Communale,
in Molenbeek, at the bus stop De Lijn where a bomb had failed to be fully
detonated, and the Loubna Square. Adverts on public transport across all of
the Brussels’s Transport Network (and in Metro stations) were replaced with
the names of the victims and were read out all day over the public
announcement system. The hashtag #itsallofus went viral on twitter and was
picked up by international (anglophone) media outlets across the world. By
contrast, the inauguration of the Place Patrice Lumumba, which seeks to
commemorate both the assassinated president and all victims of colonial
337

Delphine Bourgeois, ‘Brussels Attacks: Let’s remember together!’, Brussels Express, 22
March 2018, https://brussels-express.eu/brussels-attacks-lets-remember-together/
(accessed 8 August 2018).

201



violence, on June 30th 2018, received far less media attention and
publicity.338 The Collectif’s campaign to gain recognition for the thousands of
victims of colonial genocide in the DRC, Rwanda and Burundi did not receive
city-wide and site-specific public commemoration. The longstanding hashtags
#UnePlacePatriceLumumba and #BruxellesMaBelleDecoloniseToi have not
been picked up in anglophone media.
The disparity between acceptable forms (and days) of commemoration and
others, and the systematic exclusion of narratives of violence from Brussels’
public space, point once again to the necessity of interventions like the decolonial walking tours. By reading Brussels through the singular prism of the
so-called Islamic State attacks in 2015 and 2016, without incorporating the
much wider framework of Belgium’s history (what Sarah Arens refers to as
the ‘intersecting transnational trajectories’) our engagements will continue to
stumble over the percussive Ms of Matonge, Malbeek, Molenbeek. If, as
Dubois argues, we learn the city the fragments of geography and we can
never even begin to answer the question of ‘What is Brussels?’.

338

The inauguration was publicised by BX1, Jeune Afrique, RTL, BBC Afrique and Le Soir.
The Daily Mail was one of the few Anglophone media outlets to cover the story.

202



Figure 19 Brussels attacks: make-shift memorials spring up around city,
Source: The Daily Telegraph, 22nd March 2016 [ Photo Credit: Getty Images]

Chapter Two ‘Moving Beyond Molenbeek’ picked up on this thread of mindful
walking in the search of forgotten historical legacies, but it moved away from
an affective invocation of ghosts to a broader analysis of figurative haunting.
Through my journey between significant landmarks and quartiers on the
Collectif Mémoire Coloniale’s walking tour, I explored how structured walking
tours as new forms of resistance to colonial inequality, displaced our
engagement with Brussels beyond the haunting trope of the Molenbeek
district. Whilst the walking tours around quartiers draw on the same active
movement as the 17.10.61 project, the Collectif’s decision to align its
explorations of colonial history within the problems facing members of the
Congolese diaspora (or inhabitants of the quartiers it was exploring) helped
to situate spectrality as part of a continuum with the present-day politics and
concerns.

203



During one of my interviews with ULB researcher Véronique Clette-Gakuba
on the question of Brussels’s enduring spatial inequalities, she suggested
that:
Quand je vois des statues comme celle de Léopold II, en fait, ce
que je vois là-dedans…c’est que la ville est faite en sorte que
certains gens, certains usages sont incapables de laisser des
traces de leur présence, ils sont vites chassés, tandis que d’autres
ne font que ça- ils peuvent s’inscrire dans l’espace.339
By re-tracing the transnational trajectories so central to the construction of
Brussel’s public space, the Collectif Mémoire Coloniale is ultimately part of a
process of re-inscription, one which leaves us able to re-frame the narrative
of Brussels’ ongoing past to give space to the ‘shadows that fall like trees,
and stories that have fallen in(to) silence for too long’.340
The removal of statues of Léopold II in response to the murder of George
Floyd and the re-birth of the global Black Lives Matter movement across the
streets of Brussels point to the widening of the space dedicated to such
stories: a long-awaited offsetting of silence with stories needing to be told.

339

Interview between Ellen Davis-Walker and Véronique Clette-Gakuba, Brussels, 12th
February 2017.
340
Sophie Mayor, ‘Into the Woods’, Literal Magazine, 9 August 2018,
http://literalmagazine.com/into-the-woods/ (accessed 1 June 2022).

204



Chapter 4: Place Patrice Lumumba: Towards a New Politics of
Postcolonial Public Space
L’histoire dira un jour son mot, mais ce ne sera pas l’histoire qu’on
enseignera à Bruxelles, Washington, Paris ou aux Nations Unies,
mais celle qu’on enseignera dans les pays affranchis du
colonialisme et de ses fantoches. L’Afrique écrira sa propre histoire
et elle sera au nord et au sud du Sahara une histoire de gloire et de
dignité.
Letter from Patrice Lumumba to his partner Pauline, written three
341
days before his death.
Il suffise pour à tous signifier présent et à venir qu'un homme était
là
et qu'il a crié / en flambeau au cœur des nuits /en oriflamme au
cœur du jour/ en étendard en simple main tendue/ une blessure
inoubliable.
342

(Aime Césaire)
V.

From Matonge To Place Patrice Lumumba

What happens when the idea of haunting (and broader questions of
challenging state-backed amnesia) coalesce around a single figure or life?
How can spectre of one man — and the wider symbolism of a life cut short at
the hands of state-supported violence — play a material role in how public
space is shaped in a present-day postcolonial city?
Whilst my previous chapter examined questions of how colonial legacies and
global trends of global terrorism has impacted engagement with present-day
Brussels, I would like to shift my focus here to the question of haunting and
the spectre of Patrice Lumumba, the first prime minister of an independent
341

Julien Bobineau and Phillip Gieg (eds), The Democratic Republic of The Congo (Munster:
LIT Verlag, 2016), p. 12.
342
Aimé Césaire, ‘Pour un Cinquantenaire’, Research in African Literatures, 37 (2006), 125–
40, (p. 125)

205



Congo, assassinated in a coup led by Colonel Joseph Désiré Mobutu on 17th
January 1961. Before moving on to an analysis of the work carried out by the
collectif, it is important to expand upon some of the historical context
surrounding this particular Belgian postcolonial legacy that I set out in the
introduction to this thesis, that I want to develop in more detail here.
On the 15th of January 1961, Patrice Emery Lumumba drafted a lengthy
letter from the prison in which he was being held by Belgian captors. Whilst
reflecting on his own fate (and that of his country), he wrote to his wife
Pauline: ‘L’histoire dira un jour son mot, mais ce ne sera pas l’histoire qu’on
enseignera à Bruxelles’.343
Just two days later, Lumumba would be transferred to Elizabethville,
Katanga, where he was assassinated along with his colleagues Mpolo and
Okito. The precise details of the circumstances surrounding his death were to
be consigned to silence and speculation for well over 50 years.344
The Lumumba commission was set up in federal parliament in the spring of
2000 and in direct reaction to the publication of a book by the sociologist

343

Bobineau and Gieg, p. 13.
I have included a full timeline of the events leading up to Lumumba’s assassination as an
appendix to this chapter, as well as an additional timeline outlining key dates in the
campaign to secure a commemorative square in his honour in Brussels. Whilst I will refer to
specific dates or instances at intervals in my own intervention, this chapter is not intended to
be a contribution to historical analysis of Patrice Lumumba’s life, or recent Congolese
history. I have chosen to list these dates as an aide-memoire or a guide for readers in order
to help them better understand the ‘enjeux’ that have underpinned activist interventions in
the Belgian political sphere since 2011, as well as to help situate speeches made on the day
of the inauguration in their appropriate historical context.

344

206



Ludo De Witte, who accused the Belgian government of being responsible for
the murder of Lumumba shortly after Congo gained its independence.345
The commission was tasked with coming to a determination on as ‘the extent
to which Belgian politicians were implicated in the specific circumstance of
the death of Patrice of Lumumba’.346 In 2001, four appointed expert
historians presented their findings to the commission, describing the extent to
which Belgian government assisted in the political elimination of Lumumba as
well as his transfer to Katanga.
The final report, however, did not paint an altogether damning picture. It is
important to note that the report did conclude that the Belgian state had a
‘moral responsibility’ to acknowledge the death of Lumumba, and that ‘some
members of the Belgian government and other Belgian actors bear a moral
responsibility for the circumstances that have led to the death of
Lumumba’.347 However, there was also a deliberate attempt at distancing the
actions of the Belgian state, with a somewhat pointed reference to ‘presentday standards concerning public morals’ without taking into account ‘the then
prevailing personal moral considerations of the time period’.348

345

In order to do this, it had to produce, among other things, an ‘exhaustive inventory’ of the
facts which led to the death, define the responsibilities, and give the names of those
responsible. The commission could decide to broaden its research perspective if necessary,
but it had to appoint a team of scientific experts to assist in that research. A detailed
overview is given in Berber Bevernage, History by Parliamentary Vote: Science, Ethics and
Politics in the Lumumba Commission, History Compass (9, 2011), 300–311. See also Final
Report of the Parliamentary Commission, Part I (DOC 50 0312 ⁄ 006)
346
Bevernage, p. 301.
347
Expression used in the Expert Report which is included in the Final Report of the
Parliamentary Commission, Part II (DOC 50 0312 ⁄ 007), p. 605 (as referenced by
Bevernage p. 301).
348
Bevernage, p. 302.

207



Whilst this somewhat complex (and ambiguous) ruling on the causes of
Lumumba’s death took over 50 years to materialise, it is important to note
that cultural and musical tributes to the country’s first independent leader
have been united in their determination to speak his name. This was most
recently re-incarnated through the Belgo-Congolese artist Bajoli’s best-selling
record ‘Indépendence (le jour d’après)’, played at the inauguration of the
Place Patrice Lumumba in 2018, evoked at the closing of my previous
chapter. The origins of his track are also directly tied to Franco Luambo
Makiadi famous rumba ‘Lumumba: Heroes national’, whose central riff is
sampled at several intervals during Bajoli’s track. Makiadi’s Héros National
was rapidly to become synonymous with the values of the pan-African
movement, described by Carter Grice as ‘The apogee of an African popular
music that strove to generate an authentic, postcolonial identity in its
audience’. 349 By straying away from French, the ‘literal plurality of voice’
present in Makiadi’s lyrics allowed for an evocation of Lumumba that he
envisaged as being entirely removed from any associations with, or ties to,
the DRC’s former colonial rulers. In his 1967 hit ‘Héros National’, composed
and produced just six years after Lumumba’s assassination, Makiadi evoked
a poignant image of the memorial traces of Lumumba, and particularly of the
role of the monuments, and physical tributes, that had arisen in Kinshasa to
mark his death.

349

Carter Grice, ‘“Happy are those who sing and dance”: Mobuto, Franco, and the struggle
for Zairian identity’ (unpublished doctoral thesis, Graduate School of Western Carolina
University, 2011), p. 14.

208



He writes in Lumumba, Héros National (Franco) - Franco & L'O.K. Jazz
1967:
Lumumba azui monument na kati ya Kongo
La Belgique a échoué,
Contentieux Belgo-Congolais enterré.350
Although Makiadi had no way of knowing at the time of writing in 1967, his
evocation of spatial tributes to Lumumba’s legacy would continue to
dominate activist combats in the DRC and Belgium for many years after the
hit was released. In my previous chapter Moving Beyond Molenbeek, I
discussed how the quartier-specific walking tours hosted by the Brusselsbased Collectif Mémoire Coloniale mark an important step in re-tracing the
transnational trajectories between Belgium and the DRC, stirring up the
memories of Lumumba’s spatial legacies so central to Makiadi’s rallying cry. I
suggested that the Collectif’s walking tours, and wider campaigning for
recognition of Belgium’s colonial crimes, served as an important reminder of
how ‘L’histoire s’inscrit partout dans le paysage urbain Bruxellois….à travers
les monuments, les noms des rues, les statues’.351
These threads of memory woven into Brussels’ urban landscape — and
highlighted by the Collectif’s outreach work across the city — will be returned
to, and re-examined, in this chapter. Through my analysis of the Collectif
Mémoire Coloniale’s campaign for (and inauguration of) a square in memory
of Patrice Lumumba I return to one of the over-arching concerns of this
thesis. I ask how the Collectif’s resistance to enduring colonial inequalities

350
351

Translation: The nationalists are delighted as Lumumba now has a monument in Congo.
Author’s own fieldnotes, Brussels, 15th June 2018.

209



that have so long kept Lumumba’s ghost un-mourned and unacknowledged,
present ‘a challenge to ordered forms of social remembering’.352 Part of the
process of acknowledging how Lumumba’s ghost continues to haunt presentday Brussels is through a re-positioning of his legacy within Belgium’s
ongoing geo-political landscape, and the combat to challenge the state’s
wider amnesia surrounding its colonial past, both within the confines of the
square itself and as part of the collections curated by the Africa Museum.
More broadly speaking, I will suggest that emergence of a Place Patrice
Lumumba, as well as the recent toppling of statues of King Léopold II in
Brussels and Antwerp, represent a new point from which we can evaluate the
changing face and form of Brussels’ postcolonial landscape, and the ways in
which ‘the memory of independence and of the nation-building process is
physically connected to the [Belgian] capital’.353 Place Patrice Lumumba is
not a solution to over a decade’s worth of combat, but a vital departure point
from which to observe all of the steps the combat has taken. The square’s
inauguration, and the ambiguity surrounding its future in Belgium’s urban and
museological landscapes, require us to consider the role of site-specific
activism in campaigns for social justice, and the necessary responses
needed to allow us to attend to ghosts that are systematically excluded from

352

Tim Edensor, ‘The Ghosts of Industrial Ruins: Ordering and Disordering Memory in
Excessive Space, Environment and Planning’, Society and Space, 23 (2005), 829-849, (p.
849)
353
Sarah Arens, ‘From Mobutu to Molenbeek: Belgium and Postcolonialism’, in Postcolonial
Europe: Comparative Reflections after the Empires, ed. by Lars Jensen, Julia SuárezKrabbe, Christian Groes-Green and Zoran Lee Pecic (London: Rowman & Littlefield, 2017),
pp. 163–75, (p. 164).

210



national narratives or overshadowed by symbols of colonial power that are
only just beginning to be removed from the public sphere.
I will also consider how the lack of a contextualised or detailed history of the
Place Patrice Lumumba in the recently re-opened Africa Museum collection
are indicative of the challenges still impeding progress in Belgium’s wider
reckoning- or working through- of its colonial past. By comparing the
grassroots-backed campaign for the square to come into existence with the
representations of both the square (and the history of Lumumba) represented
in the Africa museum, we can start to observe the gaps between statesanctioned and community-lead readings of history. This is particularly
significant in the case of the Africa museum in which referenced to both
Lumumba and the CMC’s long campaign for recognition occupy noticeably
little space within the collection and are conspicuous in their absence from
the museum’s wider response to Belgian colonial history. As with Kader
Attia’s La Colonie, these curatorial choices (that ultimately determine what
perspectives and stories are elevated within national collections) are an
integral part of Mary Stevens’ vision of a ‘peaceful accommodation’ of ghosts,
or memories of lives lost under colonial rule. I argue that this stance is also
significant in the light of ongoing debates about the role of museums in
acknowledging and representing colonial history highlighted in the SarrSavoy report. The recommendations, commissioned by Emmanuel Macron in
2018, outlined a process of restitution of colonial artefacts from European
museums to their home countries, acting as a reminder of what Hassett
describes as: ‘the violence with which many objects were assimilated into

211



collections, and continues to justify their retention of such objects’.354 This
question opens up an interesting bridge with my analysis of the MNHI in
Paris, and the question of how the ghosts of colonial history are
accommodated within national institutions.
This notion of the uneasy power distribution between curators of national
collections and communities impacted by the legacies that still lack official
state recognition creates a pervasive sense that certain lives and
experiences are not worthy of being commemorated in national collections.
Indeed, the decision to display or exclude certain objects from collections
brings us back to the museological (and ideological) challenge posed by an
engagement with the ghosts of colonial history as I outlined in my discussion
of Kader Attia’s La Colonie. Leading on from Hasset, Dan Hicks underlines
the uncomfortable and unequal power dynamics afforded to spaces like the
Africa Museum and the MNHI by suggesting that:
The continued projection of the western notions of ownership onto
these objects only furthers the colonial violence and event density
that continues to propagate through time.355
Against the backdrop of these ongoing questions about the violence of
museum collections and its ability to perpetrate western notions of ownership
and control over colonial history, I will ask what the ambiguous
accommodation of Patrice Lumumba’s ghost in the Africa museum can teach
us about the progress that still needs to be made when it comes to

354

Dónal Hassett, ‘Acknowledging or Occluding “The System of Violence”?: The
Representation of Colonial Pasts and Presents in Belgium’s Africa Museum’, Journal of
Genocide Research, 22 (2020), 26–45 (p. 31).
355
Dan Hicks, The Brutish Museums (London: Pluto Press, 2020), p. 21.

212



commemorating colonial history. Similarly, by looking at the ways in which
the state’s silence surrounding the assassination of Lumumba (and with
regards to its colonial past more broadly) is challenged through a working
back of memory traces into public space, I will ask what lessons can be
gleaned about the type of commemorative measures that need to be adopted
on both a national museum level and on a (public) spatial one.
Whilst my analysis of walking tours in Matonge and Ixelles drew extensively
on the power of the walking tour format as a means to divert the attention
back to the particularities of space, this chapter offers up a different
consideration of the ongoing transfer of memory. By analysing the role
played by the square in recent activist past and in Belgium’s urban future, I
will examine the extent to which the square can serve as an example of the
complex process of the accommodation of ghosts, and what it can teach us
about the different ways that colonial legacies in both national, fixed
collections and in community-backed campaigns for recognition. I will
consider the extent to which the square’s existence (and relationship with the
haunting quality of Lumumba’s legacy) is paradoxically contingent on the
approval of a former colonial power but which has the ability to disrupt and
offset it. This can, in turn, act as a mirror or a metaphor for the trauma it has
inflicted both on Lumumba’s descendants and communities with ties to
Belgian colonialism more broadly.
Déjà, cette place [dans le quartier] fait face à la grande statue de
Léopold II qui trône un peu plus loin donc symboliquement c'est
déjà quelque chose: cette place défie donc en quelque sorte
la présence coloniale dans l'espace public bruxellois. Ensuite, le fait
qu'il y'ait une plaque explicative (un mât tronqué) permet d'éveiller

213



la curiosité des passants qui peuvent ensuite aller s'informer
sur l'assassinat de Lumumba dont la Belgique est responsable,
responsabilité que beaucoup aimeraient bien voir aux oubliettes.
Cette place est donc là aussi pour rappeler cela.356
In order to examine the extent to which the Place Patrice Lumumba presents
both an open-ended opportunity to embed an alternative reading of history
back into public space, as well as an enduring symbol of further terrain
needed to be gained, this chapter will investigate the lead up to the square’s
inauguration, paying close attention to the years of sustained grassroots
campaigning, and the ways in which the square’s inauguration is a reminder
of a shift towards ‘social remembering’ in Belgium and beyond. In the second
half, I will go on to examine the question of the square’s future legacy, and
examining the place it occupies in the collections of Belgium’s newlyreinaugurated Africa Museum, and how this offers a glimpse into the
complicated process of commemorating colonial legacies. By examining the
way in which the legacy of Patrice Lumumba is caught between national
memory narratives and grass-roots activism, we can come to better
understand the way that Lumumba’s legacy is reflected in public space, and
the implications this has for Belgium’s wider reckoning with its colonial past,
and as well as being part of a wider process of decolonising public space.
VI.

Background Of The Campaign For A Place Patrice Lumumba

Before assessing the broader implications of the square for Belgium’s
reckoning with its colonial past, it is important to assess the decade-long

356

Interviews between Ellen Davis-Walker and CMC, Brussels, 31 July 2018 and 8 August
2018.

214



struggle that led to its inception and the struggle to gain recognition for
Lumumba’s assassination in the first place. Lobbying for a memorial square
for Lumumba played a prolific role in the Collectif Mémoire Coloniale’s
cultural outreach work since its inception. On the 5th January 2011, the CMC
launched its first march entitled ‘Pour l’inauguration d’une statue de Patrice
Lumumba en Belgique’ to commemorate the 50th anniversary of Patrice
Lumumba’s assassination. The event was widely attended by representatives
from across the Belgo-Congolese activist sphere, but received no coverage
on state TV or media. This protest was subsequently followed by a mass
mobilisation of campaigners and lobbying groups from across the city and the
Belgian-Congolese diaspora to demand a commitment from the Belgian
government to officially recognise both their role in Lumumba’s death and his
utter absence from Belgium’s memorial landscape. The protest’s petition
(entitled ‘Vérité, justice, et réparation pour le peuple congolais’) was widely
circulated and eventually picked up by the Belgian branch of the ‘Revue
Marxiste’.357 These two days of successive protests eventually culminated in
a sit-in in front of the European Parliament three days later, organised by the
CMC, Ludo De Witte, and Patrice Lumumba’s son, Guy, to mark the 50th

357

These actors included: CADTM Lubumbashi, CADTM Belgique, Oasis Ndjili, INTAL, LCRSAP, Égalité, Dialoge des Peupes, Organisation Guyanaise des Droits Humains, Cercle des
Amis de Lumumba, FNDP (Forum national contre la dette et la pauvreté – Côte d’Ivoire),
Collectif des militants du Maroc de l’immigration d’Action et de lutte, Collectif “Venezuela 13
Avril”, Mouvement International de la Réconciliation, l’Internationale des Résistant-e-s à la
Guerre, Links Ecologisch Forum, Attac ULB, Respaix, Conscience Musulmane, Réveil des
Consciences, LHAC « Laïcité et Humanisme en Afrique Centrale », Comité pour les droits
humains, Collectif patriotes congolais, Collectif Aurora, Organisation communiste marxisteléniniste en Belgique (OCMLB), A.P.P.EL. (Actions pour la pensée politique de P.E.
LUMUMBA), DIASPOC (diaspora congolaise), A.A.A. (association des artistes africains),
ESPACE francophone, BEPEC (bureau d’études et de développement pour le Congo), Sans
logis international, OK services, OK solutions, A.F.A.F (association des familles
francophones), CERDEC (centre de recherche et de développement du Congo)

215



anniversary of the assassination.358 These sit-ins were to continue for a
further six years, with members of the CMC gathered in front of the
parliament every year with members of the Lumumba family. These actions
in strategic sites across the city were coupled with an online petition calling
for a Place Patrice Lumumba to be inaugurated behind the église SaintBoniface in the commune d’Ixelles and at the heart of Matonge, ‘symbole des
relations belgo-congolaises’.359
On the petition’s homepage, the Collectif highlighted the necessary spatial
dimension of its bid for justice for Lumumba, explaining:
Nous estimons qu’un travail de mémoire sur le passé colonial de la
Belgique est nécessaire. Si des monuments à Bruxelles ou à
Ostende expriment ce passé colonial en en faisant l’éloge, nous
regrettons l’absence dans nos rues d’hommage rendu à des figures
congolaises qui comme Lumumba ont lutté contre cette
colonisation.360
Its calls, however, were ignored for another seven years. In September 2013,
the Motion for a ‘Place Patrice Lumumba’ was unanimously dismissed by the
Conseil Communal d’Ixelles, and debate would not resurface for another five
years. Any talk of a square or a memorial dedicated to Lumumba would
successively disappear from the attention of both the bourgmestre and the
Conseil Communal, until the break-out of the #LeopoldMustFall protests in

358

Georges Nzongola-Ntalaja, ‘Patrice Lumumba: The Most Important Assassination of the
20th Century’, The Guardian, 17 January 2011, https://www.theguardian.com/globaldevelopment/poverty-matters/2011/jan/17/patrice-lumumba-50th-anniversary-assassination
(accessed 1 February 2019).
359
Sarah Demart, ‘Riots in Matonge’, p. 14.
360
‘Signez La Petition Pour Une Place Patrice Lumumba à Ixelles’, Gloablize.be, 3 Feburary
2011, http://www.intal.be/fr/place-lumumba (accessed 6 February 2019).

216



December 2015 (events I shall return to in more detail later in this
chapter).361
The mass circulation of images across international media, many of which
contained stickers calling for a Place Patrice Lumumba placed by
demonstrators on the statues of King Leopold II, was to lead to a flurry of
activity within the associative sphere. This included a series of small protests
lead by the CMC in front of the Église Boniface, and an Open Letter launched
by the group Bruxelles Pantheres (Qui a peur de Lumumba) which listed a
Place Patrice Lumumba in their demands.362 When asked about the
significance of the location during our meeting in June 2018 at an official
inauguration ceremony at the hotel de ville on the evening of the 29th, the
collective explained that:
Déjà, cette place [dans le quartier] fait face à la grande statue de
Léopold II qui trône un peu plus loin donc symboliquement c'est
déjà quelque chose: cette place Patrice Lumumba défie donc en
quelque sorte la présence coloniale dans l'espace public
bruxellois.363
Over the course of my investigation into the Collectif’s recent walking tours in
Matonge, Soiresse spoke to me about the spatial activism dedicated to the
legacy of Lumumba, emphasising that it was part of a much wider .“enjeux

361

This hashtag was a direct nod to the ongoing #RhodesMustFall campaign, arguably
gaining more traction by forming part of a wider decolonial movement.
362
Bruxelles Panthères, ‘Qui a peur de / Wie is er bang van Lumumba?’, 24 February 2015,
https://bruxelles-panthere.thefreecat.org/?p=2462 (accessed 6 February 2019). The
campaign also featured in Goddeeris, ‘Colonial Streets and Statues’ and Arens, ‘From
Mobotu to Molenbeek’. This is a point I will develop more substantially later on in this
chapter.
363
Interviews between Ellen Davis-Walker and CMC, Brussels, 31 July 2018 and 8 August
2018.

217



memorial, et ce conflit de mémoire dans la société’.364Soiresse’s evocation of
the opposing qualities of this ‘enjeux’ seemed to directly mirror Derrida’s
vision of the spectral, and particularly of the ‘politique de memoire et de
generations’ that, he argues, can emerge from a collective being with ghosts,
of an understanding of their presence amongst us.
Lumumba est un spectre" Soiresse replied in response to my
question, "Lumumba est un spectre […] un spectre dont nous
ignorons toujours l’existence. 365
In this chapter I argue that the enduring presence of Lumumba’s ghost
against a backdrop of intense campaigning speaks to something wider about
Belgium’s reluctance to confront its complicity in colonial crimes. Indeed, the
inauguration of the square opens up a unique possibility to re-consider the
materiality of postcolonial cities, reminding us of the forces and individuals
that determine both their composition and curatorial or municipal control. This
imbalance of power, in turn, requires us to consider the ways that spectral
traces — be they real or imagined — can invoke the violence of colonial past
and a more socially just future, all at once.
VII.

The Inauguration of The Square

In order to further build on the memorial potential of the Place Patrice
Lumumba, and to give a tentative sense of what its future In the city’s
memorial landscape might look like, it is also necessary to engage with its
moment of inception (or inauguration) in closer detail. To do so, I will use this

364

Interviews between Ellen Davis-Walker and CMC, Brussels, 31 July 2018 and 8 August
2018.
365
Interviews between Ellen Davis-Walker and CMC, Brussels, 31 July 2018 and 8 August
2018.

218



part of my chapter to return to the inauguration ceremony which took place in
the early afternoon of the 30th of June 2018, applying a new autoethnographic analytical approach and building directly on my field notes.
Whilst this constitutes something of a break from the theoretical tenets I have
set up in this chapter, it is my belief that by analysing specific ceremonial
events from the day in this way, I can convey a better sense of the vestiges
of memory and public engagement that were present at the square’s
inception, which give us clues to understanding its symbolic role as a ‘mirror
of the trauma of an event’ and its potential public function it might occupy in
the future.366
Indeed, the dispersal of diverse voices and memory traces across different
stages of the inauguration ceremony, as well as the interventions of a
different range of figures from across activist spheres and political parties,
allowed for a plurality of voices to be ritually inscribed into the square. By
examining these acts in more detail, we might catch a glimpse of the forms of
remembering and commemorating that the Place Patrice Lumumba is
cementing back into the memorial landscape of postcolonial Brussels: one
that whilst contingent on authoritarian approval in the first instance comes to
literally stand separately and independently from it.
Writing about the origins of ritual acts in public spaces, Turner argues that
ceremonies steeped in ritual should be understood as ‘that which expresses

366

Nicola Frith, ‘The Art of Reconciliation: The Memorial to the Abolition of Slavery in
Nantes’, in Nicola Frith and Kate Hodgson (eds), At the Limits of Memory: Legacies of
Slavery in the Francophone World (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2015), pp. 68–89
(p. 70).

219



supposition, desire, and possibility’. They are ‘part of the exhibition of sacra,
symbols or a higher reality; of the dramatization of creation stories; of the
appearance of masked and monstrous figures; the construction of
complicated shrines, and of revelation’.367 The mixture of simultaneous rituals
and processions, the interweaving of words and movement, of the range of
actors and discourses present on the day of the inauguration, echoed
Turner’s vision of a ‘complicated shrine’. This innate tension between the
subjective or the supposed present in Turner’s theorisation of ritual can
inform our reading of the events of 30 June 2018, reminding us of the diverse
layers of experience and engagement that were present over the course of
the day.
The morning of the inauguration fell in the middle of a heat wave, with early
morning temperatures creeping up into the low thirties. The ceremony had
been publicised as beginning at midday. Having walked to the Porte de
Namur seeking shade and respite from sunburn under the trees of the
Avenue Louise, I arrived to find a number of chairs lined up outside a rigged
stage, positioned just opposite the exit of the metro (to the evident confusion
of various members of the public exiting via the turnstiles). The stage itself
was covered in red and green awning to protect speakers from the heat. This
structure was held up by metal poles which had been draped in typical red
and white Kuba cloth. The square itself was empty apart from a couple of
bystanders, and several journalists. The momentary sense of peace and

367

Victor Turner, ‘Frame, Flow and Reflection: Ritual and Drama as Public
Liminality’, Japanese Journal of Religious Studies, 6 (1970), 400–99, (p. 470).

220



stillness was almost immediately offset by the sound of drumming that was
coming from the other side of the street at the crossroads into the quartier of
Matonge.
When I followed the sounds, I came across a procession of dancers and
drummers who, according to a member of the Collectif I recognised and
spoke to, hailed from Lumumba’s home village. Four drummers were
assembled on the left-hand side of the street, in the middle of the road. The
dancers were partially obscured by the crowd that had gathered when I
arrived on the scene and they began to sing in Lingala as the tempo of their
music intensified. As they danced, they also proceeded to sweep members of
the crowd to one side to make way for something. Who, or what, was not
made initially clear. As the volume of the drumming intensified so did the
repetition of one name ‘Lumumba’.
As a chief dancer parted the crowd, a small, ordered brass band came
forward playing the opening notes of the La Brabançonne, and a statue of
Lumumba (pictured overleaf) was pushed out across the road towards the
square.

221



Figure 20 Patrice Lumumba is pushed out into the Avenue Louise
roundabout [Photo Author’s Own]

The road down which the cart was being pushed lead to a busy roundabout
leading back towards the Avenue de Louise to the right and the Chausée
d’Ixelles to the left. The square was filled with press representatives, film
crews, commuters and bystanders, journalists, and bourgmestre, Phillipe
Close. Representatives from the Collectif kept close to members of
Lumumba’s family as they gathered together at the edge of the stage. As the
cart came to a halt next to the newly erected sign Place Patrice Lumumba,

222



the bourgmestre signalled to the Lumumba family and various
representatives from his own office to take to the stage. They were shortly
followed by Kalvin Soiresse Njal, and Mireille-Tsheusi Robert and Alex
Bande from ABL, who opened an hour’s worth of speeches and reflections to
mark the transition into the second part of the ceremony.
This transition from the sensory, somewhat chaotic procession from the
fringes of Matonge to the enforced stillness of the square and its ‘official’
ceremony, is a reminder of what Benjamin describes as the distinctions
between the involuntary and conscious memory: thoughts that can come to a
participant or actor when carrying out a ritualistic ceremony. He suggests that
involuntary memories come upon us, rekindling the past through ‘unexpected
confrontations with sounds, atmospheres and nonvisual sensual
experiences’.368 Unlike our recorded memories (which are organised and
stored individually or collectively) involuntary memories surge with vigour but
are not categorical precisely because they never were subject to deliberate
compilation. These memory traces he suggests, are what come about
through ‘lights, colours, vegetation, heat, air, slender explosions of noises...
passages, gestures’, all only ‘half-identifiable’, unlike the ‘identifiable’
associates we create with structured or ordered events.369
Two particular instances from this formal ceremony stand out, and I believe
require some more detailed unpacking here. The first was the official speech

368

Walter Benjamin, Charles Baudelaire: A Lyric Poet in the Era of High Capitalism (London:
Verso, 1997), p. 28.
369
Benjamin, p. 29.

223



by the Bourgmestre, delivered in French, Flemish and English at the
beginning of the ceremony. His allocated time slot appeared to have been
pushed back after a member of the public attempted to take to the stage with
cries of ‘Assassin! Assassin’. The bourgmestre chose to ignore these
comments, and the member of the public in question was physically carried
off stage by Alex Bande, who led him away to the shade of some nearby
trees. Undeterred by the security presence of the stage behind him, the
Bourgmestre quickly turned the focus of his speech to the question of
present-day responsibility for colonial crimes, and the role that Belgium had
to play in coming to terms with its colonial past. Turning to face the members
of the Lumumba family at various intervals, his words seemed to very closely
mirror a speech he had given in January 2018 when the statue of Lumumba
had been unveiled at the galerie Ravenstein.370 Addressing the crowd, he
reminisced that:
La Belgique a commencé son examen de conscience en 2000 avec
une commission parlementaire sur l'assassinat du leader congolais.
Une commission qui conclut en 2001 à la "responsabilité morale" de
la Belgique, sans que l’on puisse expliquer ce qu’on entend
clairement par là. Mais malgré ces excuses, on sent que notre pays
reste mal à l’aise vis-à-vis de ce passé peu glorieux. C’est pour
dissiper ce malaise, pour pouvoir enfin regarder notre passé
colonial droit dans les yeux, que la ville de Bruxelles a décidé
d’ériger cette place.371
Whether intentional or not, Close’s speech (and the commission’s
conclusion) indirectly emphasised a sense of Belgium’s moral obligation to

370

I have explained the context of this unveiling in footnote 344.
See the quotation of Close’s speech in Julien Vlassenbroek, ‘Patrice Lumumba: une
statue pour regarder notre passé colonial en face’, RTBF, 22 January 2018.
https://www.rtbf.be/info/societe/detail_patrice-lumumba-une-statue-pour-regarder-notrepasse-colonial-en-face?id=9818789 (accessed 22 January 2018).

371

224



act rather than a legal or required one. By replacing the need for a legal
response to a criminal act with a moral obligation to act accordingly, there is
a subtle shift away from the seriousness of the crime at hand.
However, the speech also echoed many of the words of interviews carried
out with members of the Collectif, as well as many of the blog posts that they
had published concerning the need for a statue to commemorate Lumumba’s
legacy and to acknowledge Belgium’s colonial crimes in the DRC. His
mixture of scripted speech and improvised movement (including oscillating
between looking at the Lumumba family and the crowd) created a strange
mix of the familiar with the formal. His echoing of both the colonial’s own
mantra (‘ce qui est fait sans nous est fait contre nous’) and chosen excerpts
from Lumumba’s final letter in captivity created a strange selection of
associations. They were the types of memory traces that, as Reynarde
argues ‘mix bodily memories with recollected overlapping geographies, with
their reference points, routes, and networks, and contingently map them onto
other spaces, like phantom realms.’372
By invoking these phantom realms of geography that keep Belgium and the
DRC inextricably bound (as well as his reference to the Collectif’s longstanding combat to gain spatial recognition for Lumumba’s murder) Close’s
speech stirred up a number of different reactions, sensations and stories that
were, momentarily, held together in the confines of the crowd. This sense of
a phantom link felt all the more prescient when Kalvin Soiresse took to the

372

Anne Reynarde, ‘Migrants’ accounts of Rio’, Space and Culture, 7 (2004), 1–13 (p. 7).

225



stage to give a dramatic reading of Lumumba’s final letter written in captivity,
just days before his assassination (which is cited in the opening pages of this
chapter).
However, the second, and arguably the most striking element of the
ceremony came in the form of a speech given by Patrice Lumumba’s
youngest living son, Roland, whose words brought the afternoon’s events to
a close. Approaching the lecturn, he addressed the audience with what felt
like a consciously reconciliatory tone:
58 ans après on se souvient enfin du désir de Patrice Lumumba, de
son désir de réconciliation entre la RDC et la Belgique... C’est une
nouvelle amitié qui se crée avec cette place…373

The image of reconciliation struck by Lumumba’s youngest child was a fitting
and poignant note with which to bring an end to the official ceremony (which
would rapidly descend to a press scramble to get photos of the sign
unveiling, to the accompanying sound of Bajoli’s Independence). The
presence of Lumumba’s children in the commemorative ceremony, and the
bridge of conciliation and hope invoked on his speech, was a reminder of
Benjamin’s assertion that:
Successive living spaces never disappear completely; we leave
them without leaving them because they live in turn, invisible and
present, in our memories and in our dreams. They journey with
us.374

373
374

Roland Lumumba’s speech, Brussels, 30th August 2018 (author’s recording).
De Certeau, p. 14.

226



The invocation of connections between Belgium and the DRC, as well as
between the spectre of Lumumba and his living children, was an active
reminder of Michael Rothberg’s vision of multi-directional memory’s dynamic
and anachronistic quality, bridging different spheres of space and time, as
well as between the living and the dead. This process of journeying through
memory, of movement between places and countries, different sounds,
moods and forms of light, all felt present in his words. As Lumumba shook
hands with Phillipe Close before being hastily propelled towards the newly
unveiled sign, many of the bystanders distanced themselves from the main
crowd or broke off into small groups to observe the media entourage from
afar. Their gestures reflected the presence of stillness in chaos, the spilling
over of reflection into active movement and the possibility for individually
guided responses to collective rituals and ceremonies. They were a quiet, yet
irrefutable reminder of the square’s openness to being with memories and
standing alone, to observe the possibility of what lies ahead, just as the
present we find ourselves in, as its open potential begins to crystallise before
our very eyes.
IV.

Place Patrice Lumumba and Belgian Social Remembering

By enacting much of Rothberg’s thinking about multi-directional memory in
real time, the square inauguration became an active reminder of the ways
that activist campaigns (and social movements more broadly) can challenge
seemingly fixed models of state-enforced remembering and forgetting.
Through the sustained campaigns of the CMC and the inauguration of the
square, Lumumba’s presence is transformed from being an abstract force for

227



change and a symbol of resistance, to something much more tangible and
permanent. The square and accompanying statue, as such, becomes a
physical means of extending the bridge first evoked in Guy Lumumba’s
speech between Lumumba’s assassination and the formal apology issued by
the state, between the origins of the square’s campaign and the physical
alternate reading of history that the plaque offers after years of silence on
behalf of the Belgian state.
The square’s symbolic placement, as both a material object in city space and
a symbol of broader campaigns for justice for colonial crimes, I suggest,
becomes a new way to shine new light on Edensor’s theory of ‘social
remembering’. Edensor outlines the term in reference to what he sees as a
cosmopolitan trend in commemorating historical injustices or crimes. This
shift towards spatial recognition of colonial crimes becomes particularly
significant, as:
The democratic nature of shared monuments, statues or memorial
sites becomes a means to transcend ethnic and national
boundaries as cultures become deterritorialised and are transmitted
into the local via the global media.375
Following on from Edensor, I suggest that these sites, quite apart from their
democratic or shareable function, act as cornerstones for a commemorative
culture that is attuned to the specificities of colonial heritage of a city, and
that is committed to tending to and honouring its forgotten ghosts and
overlooked voices. During my interview with representatives from the
collective several days after the inauguration, their reflections seemed to

375

Edensor, p. 83.

228



mirror something of this thinking.
These sentiments were corroborated by one anonymous participant, who told
me that:
Ce square, s’il est dénommé aujourd’hui Lumumba, c’est par la
lutte qu’il a été obtenu, une lutte de tous les instants, une lutte
citoyenne, pour laquelle plusieurs activistes, militants, simples
citoyens ont donné de leur temps, de leur argent, de leur énergie
physique et intellectuelle. Nous aimerions que cette place
Lumumba devienne symboliquement une place de souvenir,
d'éducation, mais aussi de revendication contre toutes les formes
d'impérialisme (combat de Patrice Lumumba et qui lui a coûté la
vie). Nous voulons améliorer la condition et la perception des
Africains et Africaines ici en Belgique, promouvoir les cultures
africaines, éveiller les esprits sur les questions de citoyenneté
responsable.376
By giving a physical form to the legacy of Lumumba’s ghost and the
sustained activist combat that demanded his unjust fate be duly recognised,
Place Patrice Lumumba comes to embody something of Edensor’s vision of
social remembering. By choosing to ground these spectral and political
tensions into one tangible space, this square is synonymous with the need to
spatialise campaigns for social justice, to create what Nicola Frith describes
as ‘other types of space’ where legacies of traumatic memories can be
tended to and acknowledged by passers-by. 377
This possibility is particular significant in the case of Place Patrice Lumumba,
whose position at the fringes of both Matonge and Ixelles means it is
constantly open to re-inscription or re-articulation by visitors to the square, by
passers-by or ‘everyday practitioners of the city’.378 Its presence also points

376

Interview with Ellen Davis-Walker and anonymous participant, Brussels, 23rd May 2018.
Rothberg, p. 13.
378
De Certeau, p. 22.
377

229



to the possibility of these forms of social remembering to divert our attention
to streets and squares whose potential might as yet remain unknown. It is
also a reminder of Van Dijk’s assertion that:
Contemporary processes of social remembering are becoming
increasingly externalised, staged outside the local through the
intensified mediatisation and commodification of popular sites,
myths, and icons.379
In her introduction to ‘Protest, Property and the Commons’, Lucy FinchettMaddock evokes a similar image of social combats being externalised or
made visible through site-specific activism in city space. Describing the role
of protestors in the Occupy movement, she writes that:
They explode through the cracks in the system and when they are
crushed – often forcibly – they leave pieces of themselves
everywhere, in the hearts of the people who went there, in new
behaviour, new alliances, and new thoughts. They are a practical
attempt to get free from the state, to be free from the compromises
and creeping obedience of a legal space.380
This image of breaking through, of the dispersal of traces of individuals and
diverse memories into the places and people who pass through, provides a
privileged vantage point with which to view the open-ended potential of these
postcolonial spaces. Through the act of breaking and re-formulating social
memories within space, passers-by who walk through the Place Patrice
Lumumba become part of a re-working of traumatic memory and forgotten
legacies back into space. They are endowed with the possibility of
embodying Vergès’ vision of a contact memory, of linking different strands of

379

Jose Van Dijk, ‘Mediated memories: personal cultural memory as object of cultural
analysis’, Continuum, 18 (2004), 200–62 (p. 222).
380
Lucy Finchett-Maddock, Protest, Property and the Commons: Performances of Law and
Resistance (London: Routledge, 2016), p. 12.

230



memory and affiliation into this newly-created ‘common space’ whose future
role is open to interpretation and to re-inscription across the city. Through its
position on the edge of the quartier of Matonge at the fringe of its walking
tours, and at a busy crossroad, passers-by (whether consciously or
unconsciously) become part of a ritual re-writing, or re-walking, of the space.
By offering up different affective and associative memory, the Place Patrice
Lumumba becomes a site of re-connection with a colonial past, for those who
stop and admire the statue and the information plaque. It is a way of ensuring
individual freedom to move, whilst also allowing for the active re-inscription
through footsteps and voices, through spectral traces and living encounters.
It is at this unique juncture between the spectral and the living, as well as
between civic duty and individual freedom, that the future for the Place
Patrice Lumumba might be glimpsed and temporarily proffered as an object
of analysis. The act of walking becomes an act of a double inscription; a
homage to the marches and protests that lead to the conception of the Place
Patrice Lumumba and a symbol of open-ended possibility. This act is loaded
with potential of memory traces to offer up alternative readings of history (to
follow from Silverman) which reveal the potential for the square to act as a
space ‘which is characterised by its openness to the other, for its possibility
for an encounter with the other’.381 It is in this place of open-ended possibility
either to encounter alterity, or to ‘leave pieces of [oneself] everywhere’ that
we might come to create ‘new behaviour, new alliances, and new

381

Stavros Stavrides, Common Space: The City as Commons (London: Zed Books, 2016),
p. 10.

231



thoughts’.382 Through its conception and way of being in present-day public
space, Place Patrice Lumumba becomes a moment to be with and without
absent figures or strands of history. It is a locus for memories, new and old,
to come in to being to take up space.
Between 2000 and 2001, a Belgian parliamentary commission of inquiry had
already worked on the assassination on January 17th, 1961 of Patrice
Lumumba, former prime minister of Congo. A commission which concluded
with the ‘moral responsibility’ for the circumstances that have led to the death
of Lumumba’. But they immediately add that they thereby assume the
‘present day standards concerning public morals and without taking into
account the then prevailing personal moral considerations’.383
V.

Place Patrice Lumumba and the Africa Museum

To help us think about the role that the Place Patrice Lumumba will play in a
wider movement of decolonising Belgian public space, I want to move on to
consider the role played by the square in the two years that have passed
since its inauguration, and the ways in which its presence is felt, or alluded
to, in other facets of Belgium’s cultural landscape. Part of this process
involves looking at how the square’s presence is acknowledged in the newly
re-opened Africa museum, and to think more broadly about Stevens’ vision of
the curatorial decisions about a venue that contribute to an accommodation
of — and peaceful co-existence with — the venue’s figurative ghosts. I

382

Stavrides, p. 10.
Expression used in the Expert Report which is included in the ‘Final Report of the
Parliamentary Commission, Part II’ (DOC 50 0312 ⁄ 007), as referenced by Bevernage, (p.
301).

383

232



suggest that these choices about both the artefacts that are displayed in the
museum, as well as the ways in which grassroots campaign for recognition of
Belgian colonial crimes are referred to, provide a vital place from which to
observe how the spectre of Lumumba is acknowledge beyond the site of the
square itself. They also provide a clear example of what the Sarr-Savoy
report posits as the problem with European museums engaging with colonial
history that:
The problem arises when the museum no longer becomes the site
for the affirmation of national identity, but, as Benoît de L’Estoile
indicates, is seen rather as a museum of the Others; when the
museum conserves objects procured from somewhere else and
assumes the right to speak about these Others (or in the name of
the Others) and claims to declare the truth concerning them.384
Moreover, as the report suggests,
Through these objects and the narratives placed onto these socalled ethnographic collections are ways of controlling
representations of societies, often essentializing them, as well as
creating a crystallization of categories oftentimes produced by
coloniality upon the peoples and African cultures.385
I build on from the that the tension between the site of the Patrice Lumumba
and the Africa Museum’s state-funded collections provides a means to open
up questions about the differences between local or micro traces of memory
and national memory narratives perpetrated by museum collections. This
dynamic also opens up an important point of comparison with the Cite
Nationale de L’Histoire de L’immigration and site-specific Parisian artefacts

384

Benoît de L’Estoile, Le Goût des Autres: de l’Exposition Coloniale aux Arts Premiers
(Paris: Flammarion, 2007), p. 20.
385
See also Philippe Descola, ‘Passages de témoins’, Le Débat, 147 (2007), 136–53 (p.
138); Patrick Boucheron, ‘Leçon inaugurale de Patrick Bougeron au Collège de France’, 17
December 2015, https://www.college-de-france.fr/agenda/lecon-inaugurale/ce-que-peuthistoire/ce-que-peut-histoire (accessed 1 November 2021).

233



such as 17.10.61 and La Colonie that I will go on to explore in further detail
as part of my conclusion.
In December 2018, the Belgian Africa Museum re-opened in Tervuren,
following over eight years of quite extensively publicised restoration.
Originally baptised the ‘Royal Museum for Central Africa’, the collections
began as a temporary exhibition in 1897 in Tervuren (home to the King
Leopold).386 The United Nations’ definition for international protocols
surrounding reparation claims and protocols states ‘reparation includes
restitution, compensation, rehabilitation and satisfaction, as well as
guarantees of non-repetition’ for affected parties.387 The museum’s
advertisement of funding for group placements and internships in various
disciplines exclusively for young African scientists, as well as promising a
research culture dedicated to the politics of central Africa, point to an outward
desire for reconciliation and progress. Furthermore, the updated collections
were, according to the museum’s mission statement, curated following
consultation with what the museum described as the ‘African diaspora’.388
Nonetheless, the re-opening and re-housing of disputed artefacts following
five years of restoration has sparked intense debate in local activist circles,

386

The museum attracted much notoriety for its inclusion of a ‘human zoo’, a mock African
village set up in the estate’s woods and ponds, which housed the 267 Congolese men,
women and children that Leopold had imported to Tervuren and displayed for members of
the public.
387
United Nations (UN), ‘Basic principles and guidelines on the right to a remedy and
reparation for victims of violations of International Human Rights and Humanitarian Law:
resolution / adopted by the General Assembly’, 16 December 2005,
https://www.ohchr.org/en/instruments-mechanisms/instruments/basic-principles-andguidelines-right-remedy-and-reparation (accessed 2 February 2023).
388
It is interesting to note, however, that in a press release issued to mark the opening of the
museum, the Collectif Mémoire Coloniale lamented the fact that they, and other activist
groups, had not been consulted enough.

234



and in the international press, surrounding the role Belgium should play in
displaying stolen colonial artefacts.
In his recent article discussing the re-opening of the Africa Museum (and its
troubling inclusion of stolen ceremonial artefacts and statues showing
dehumanising representations of enslaved Congolese men, women and
children), Donal Hassett has argued that:
The goal of the museum’s “work of decolonization” was not to lay
bare the oppressive mechanisms and hierarchies of privilege. It was
to provide a supposedly neutral space in which visitors could weigh
up the pros and cons of the colonial project, as presented by the
museum’s staff, and come to their own conclusion on Belgian rule
in Africa. This fetishization of “balance” would come at the cost of a
real reckoning with the colonial past not just of Belgium and the
former colonies but also of the institution itself.389
Hassett is also quick to draw attention to the somewhat problematic absence
of non-white voices and actors in the curatorial process, as well as the lack of
sustained dialogue with members of the Congolese diaspora or activist
communities seeking recognition and justice for Belgium colonisation.
He writes:
The marginalization of African voices in the renovation process
cannot simply be ascribed to some form of overt racial animus.
Rather, it is symptomatic of the divergence between administrators
and diasporic activists as to what exactly unmaking/remaking the
museum should mean. The museum’s staff, overwhelmingly white
and with no specific training on the decolonization process, were to
be the sole arbiters of this debate.390
The conflicting memories and legacies of Belgian colonialism that are
embodied by (or exhibited in) the Africa Museum has further underlined the

389
390

Hassett, p. 31.
Hassett, p. 30.

235



complexities of what Sarah Arens has described as ’the lasting connection
between the physical landscape of Brussels and the Congo Free State.391
The close connection between the inauguration of the Place Patrice
Lumumba and the re-opening of the Africa Museum (only four months apart)
once again highlights the ripple effect of grassroots movements and public
space, between spatial interventions and transnational connections between
Brussels and the DRC. Similarly, the sweeping and non-contextualised
reference to the presence of the Place Patrice Lumumba and the erasure of
the years of campaigning for official recognition both of Lumumba’s
assassination and an incorporation of Belgian colonial past into education
and museums reinforce Hasset’s condemnation of the white self-referentiality
of the museum’s curatorial process.392 Lumumba’s assassination, and the
campaigning required to secure recognition, occupy one small panel in the
entire collection the position of which is obscured somewhat by the entrance
to the western part of the museum, tucked away from the main exhibits.
In The Fight to Decolonise the Museum, Adam Hochschild underlines the
problematic nature of the choices about what was mentioned and omitted in
the Africa Museum’s collection, arguing that:
Whoever chose the chicottes and other objects on display had a far
different sense of history than whoever compiled the interactive
historical timeline on computers in this gallery and several others. It
omits several major anti-colonial rebellions and never mentions the
large mutinies among black conscripts in King Leopold’s private

391
392

Arens ‘Imagining Brussels’, p. 12.
Hasset, p. 15.

236



army. Slave labour gets mentioned only in passing, and the scale of
the international protest movement is barely hinted at.393
These omissions highlighted by Hochschild are mirrored in the museum’s
engagement with both Patrice Lumumba and the campaign to secure a
memorial square in his honour. As demonstrated in the figure below, the two
sentences dedicated to the square’s inauguration — and the failure to
elaborate on the community and origins behind the ‘longue campagne’ —
provide a visual illustration of the absence of discourse and recognition that
the collectif had fought so hard to combat. Moreover, the failure to include
any reference to the square’s activist origins and the state’s resistance to
approving the motion to erect a square in Lumumba’s name, reveals the
institution’s broader failure to adopt the decolonised optic it had so publicly
promised.

393

Adam Hochschild, ‘When Museums have Ugly Pasts’, The Atlantic, Jan/Feb 2020,
https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2020/01/when-museums-have-uglypasts/603133/ (accessed 01 June 2022).

237



Figure 21 Photo of an explanatory panel, Africa Museum, February 2020
Author’s Own

Indeed, in the weeks after the museum’s official opening, the Collectif
released the following statement on its blog:
Le CMCLD trouve que la diaspora n’a pas été suffisamment
écoutée et mise à contribution pour ce travail important. Par
ailleurs, le musée ayant changé de dénomination et s’appelant
désormais Africa Museum, nous estimons que les Africains doivent
jouer un rôle significatif à l’intérieur de ce musée et non un rôle
subsidiaire. En somme, les Africains doivent se retrouver non plus
derrière la vitrine mais devant la vitrine.
Nous, Collectif, resterons vigilants quant au processus de
décolonisation effectif et non cosmétique du Musée. Et nous nous

238



déclarons toutefois disposés à accompagner le musée dans ce
travail de décolonisation totale si le besoin nous en est exprimé. 394
The Collectif’s commitment to decolonisation ‘effectif et non cosmétique’
underlines both the problematic nature of the Africa Museum’s collections, as
well as the broader questions of how colonial history is memorialised, offered
up and attested to in public space. By placing objects or vestiges of colonial
memory under public scrutiny in museums or in spaces, the cases of both the
Africa Museum and the Place Patrice Lumumba, remind us of the ethnical
dimensions underpinning the exhibiting and framing of these memorial
traces, and the questions of how (or by whom) they can be accessed.
Moreover, the exclusion of the Collectif’s campaign from the museum’s
collection — as well as the failure to acknowledge the role played by the
Belgian state in both Lumumba’s assassination and preluding the erection of
a square in his memory — paints a troubling picture for the museum’s future
in Belgium’s memorial landscape. Similarly, the move towards a spatial
acknowledgement of Belgian’s colonial past, be it through the curation of
museum collections or a square dedicated to an assassinated president, is
once again representative of Van Dijk’s vision of an ‘externalisation’ of social
and colonial remembering in a Belgian context, requiring new forms of critical
attention and engagement in the field of Francophone Postcolonial
Studies.395

394

Collectif Mémoire Coloniale, ‘2019, Communique Reouverture du Musée Royal d’Afrique:
Une Decolonisation Manquee’,
https://www.memoirecoloniale.be/communiques/communique-reouverture-du-musee-royaldafrique-centrale-une-decolonisation-manquee (accessed 13 January 2019). This post was
later shared on the group’s Facebook and Twitter pages respectively.
395
Van Dijk, p. 14.

239



In this chapter, I have sought to further nuance this interplay between
individual ghosts and national debates surrounding commemorative spaces.
Building on field notes, photos and ethnographic observations of Place
Patrice Lumumba, I explored how the campaigning in the lead up to the
inauguration set in motion the possibilities for new forms of social
remembering, both within the square itself and through the collections of the
newly re-opened Africa Museum. I suggest that the museum’s transient
reference to the role of the square — as well as the lack of reference to the
grassroots activist groups that were crucial in securing its inception — once
again points to an unwillingness to fully engage both with the spectre of
Lumumba, as well as Belgian complicity in colonial crimes more broadly. The
contrast between the transient, open-ended potential of the unpoliced public
space, with the ossification of its legacy in the newly-reopened museum
collection, serves as a reminder both of the complexities of social
remembering, and the ways in which ghosts of colonial legacies can be
acknowledged by former colonial powers. Be it in the confines of the Africa
Museum or across the long-fought for place, Lumumba’s ghost continues to
linger: acknowledged, but not fully attended to: always demanding
recognition and new forms of remembering.

240



Conclusion
IV.

Overview of Position

I opened this thesis with the words of Swedish poet Thomas Tranströmer,
who considers how the landscapes of his native Sweden — and an imagined
blue house glimpsed in the night — are irrevocably transformed by the
spectre of grief and loss. I aligned Tranströmer’s imagery with Judith Butler’s
broader vision of ‘the transformative power of loss’ to think about how
relationships to landscapes, and particularly cityscapes, are transformed by
unchartered undercurrents of absence and legacies of lost lives.396 These
texts provided an entry point from which to explore a sense of how the
legacies of colonial history are being worked through in the cities of Paris and
Brussels, and specifically how grass-roots level (or community)
commemorative practices allow for more nuanced understanding of space to
emerge. These are threads that I would like to pick up and return to over the
course of this conclusion to examine the points of comparison and
consensus that we can draw from Paris and Brussels and ask how former
colonial capitals commemorate and come to terms with their colonial past.
Throughout this thesis I have advocated for a re-imagining of postcolonial
legacies in the present day, seeking out case studies from across art and
activism that offer us a more-nuanced understanding of the historical weight
that spaces can hold, as well as the types of initiatives needed to shed light
on alternative readings of history. Returning to legacies of maligned historical

396

Tranströmer, p. 12; and Butler, Precarious Life, p. 14.

241



events and overlooked locations in the capitals of former colonial powers, I
have argued, can help shed light on the complex way that we grieve, on how
experiences of grief tend to be overlooked by others, and on the way that the
spaces around us are changed as a result of that grief. In this dynamic, I
suggest that grief is able to ultimately move beyond the personal to become
a process of deeper reflection. It becomes a process of making unknowable
to distant experiences more explicit, of rendering generational experiences
visible in public space and, as such, of making those heritages accessible to
a wider audience. This process opens us up to the ‘we that grieves’, opens
up the ‘we’ and takes it to a wider set of people. Haunting exposes a
collective loss that, depending on the standpoint, one individual might feel as
recent and searing, or another might suddenly sense and tap into. By
exposing the shared threads of vulnerability that is able to bring together
trans-generation or previously unknown stories to light, that binds
communities and passers-by in a shared sense of connection, in the power of
stories that have been too-long silenced and are now finding recourse to be
heard in space.
I have also set out the means by which stories and perspectives, or what
Tranströmer refers to in the Blue House as ’phantom ships’ can be
channelled in order to bring about greater awareness of colonial history and
overlooked perspectives that we might sense but never explicitly see
represented.397

397

Tranströmer, p. 12.

242



Throughout each of my four chapters, my analysis has explored the ways in
which 17.10.61, La Colonie, the walking tours organised by the Collectif
Memoire Coloniale and the Place Lumumba offer up new readings of
postcolonial cities, allowing insights into colonial history that exist outside of
the remit of state-backed amnesia to emerge in the gaps left by what Lia
Brozgal has referenced (in relation to the 17th October massacre) as a ‘lack
of scriptable clues’ testifying to state-backed violence.398 Central to this reengagement with postcolonial spatiality is a new vision of haunting and a
conscious re-engagement with forgotten voices, and spectres of longoverlooked state violence. At the start of this thesis, I posited a vision of
haunting as something that is at once emotive whilst at the same time
inherently spatial and tied to the different memories (and collective histories)
of my two chosen cities, Paris and Brussels. Alongside this, I have advocated
for ghosts to be understood not simply as the legacy of a departed person left
upon the earth but as a reminder of injustices that have yet to be redressed,
and of voices that are demanding recognition and acknowledgement. Ghosts,
I have argued, must therefore be understood as symbols of state-sanctioned
forgetting surrounding certain crimes, and of the gaps left on a spatial level
where memorials, recognition or official acknowledgements should be found
but aren’t. I have suggested that my chosen case studies create an affective
bridge between past colonial crimes and their haunting socio-economic or
political ramifications in the present. In doing so they are able to underline
both the inherently politicised and political nature of walking and cast light on

398

Brozgal, p. 34.

243



how enduring legacies of inequality shape where is safe to move through, as
well as how having ‘the right skin colour and passport’ influence who has the
freedom to move where, and under what conditions.399
This analysis has been underpinned by my chosen cross-border and crossdisciplinary mixed-methods approach. Over the course of my four chapters I
have combined theoretical analysis from the fields of memory and
postcolonial studies, with a mixture of close textual and visual analysis of
artefacts, first-hand ethnographic observations and semi-structured
interviews. I believe that this methodology has shone new light on the
affective traces of grief — and long-forgotten legacies of loss — that can be
tapped in to if only our understanding and perception of city space can be
expanded in the right way. Whilst Paris and Brussels are, in many ways,
shaped by distinct postcolonial legacies, my case studies have sought to
bring to life the hidden traces of those who lives were lost in untimely and
unjust circumstances at the hands of colonial powers, showing how a more
universal understanding about the nature of memory and loss can be teased
out through a cross-border, comparative analytical approach. In this
conclusion I will build on this approach, setting out my vision of what we can
learn from each of my case studies about the importance of engaging with
haunting, as well as the directions and possibilities that I think it can offer up
to researchers in the field of Francophone Postcolonial studies: threads I
have touched on across each of my four chapters.

399

Edward Soja, Seeking Spatial Justice (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2010),
p. 12.

244



As a departure point, I would like to return to the question of how we can go
about responding to (and representing) legacies that a former colonial power
has largely failed to acknowledge, and whether there are any universal
lessons that can be drawn from looking at former sites of colonial rule in my
chosen countries. Whilst my intervention has been confined to France and
Belgium, what can these case studies teach us about how to go about
commemorating crimes in ways that centre the right kind of experiences, and
is informed by what Mary Stevens describes as the ‘decisions and nondecisions’ that centre individuals whose perspectives have been excluded
from national discourse?400 By juxtaposing the impact of community and
group-led artistic projects with the collections and curatorial decisions in
national institutions, I will look at the contrasting ways that haunting legacies
of France and Belgium’s separate colonial history are tended to and
represented, and what different lessons can be gleaned from opposing forms
of commemoration. I will also set out what I see as necessary questions for
researchers in the field of Francophone Postcolonial Studies in the light of
the findings of this thesis, and the further opportunities for research and
cross-disciplinary collaboration that I believe are opened up by this thesis.
In Chapter 1, Learning to walk with ghosts: Spectro-Digital Geographies with
17.10.61, I followed the street-art collective Raspouteam’s interactive web
documentary 17.10.61. Across my chapter, I explored how the creation of
‘digital spectro-geographies’ through the web documentary and site-specific

400

Stevens, p. 23.

245



installations across Paris can allow for new engagements with the memories
of the 17th October 1961 massacre to emerge. In Chapter 2, I went on to
examine the work of La Colonie particularly in relation to commemorating the
anniversaries of the 17th October 1961 massacre, before comparing its work
to the collections housed at the MNHI. In doing so, I was able to examine the
extent to which the venue contributes to what Clerval and Fleury have
described as the ‘embellishment of the city’ and the means to which La
Colonie becomes caught up in a complicated accommodation of ghosts.
Chapter 3 examined the extent to which the walking tours hosted by the
Collectif Memoire Coloniale galvanised greater public engagement and
awareness of Belgium’s colonial past, whilst helping to address the complete
absence of colonial history in the current walking tour landscape in the city.
Finally, in Chapter 4, I examined the Collectif Memoire Coloniale’s campaign
for the Place Patrice Lumumba in more detail and I asked how the group’s
resistance to enduring colonial inequalities that have so long kept
Lumumba’s ghost un-mourned and unacknowledged, present ‘a challenge to
ordered forms of social remembering’.401 I also considered how a lack of a
contextualised or detailed history of the Place Patrice Lumumba in the Africa
Museum collection are indicative of the challenges still impeding progress in
Belgium’s wider reckoning — or working through — of its colonial past.
V.

401

Why do we need to understand haunting?

Edensor, p. 12.

246



Before moving on to look at the impact of these case studies and future
directions for research within Francophone Postcolonial Studies in greater
detail, I believe it is important to return to the vision of haunting that I set out
at the start of this thesis. In order to effectively ascertain what lessons can be
gleaned from adopting a cross-border (or cross-discipline) approach within
the field of Francophone Postcolonial Studies, it is important to outline what
aspects of my vision of haunting should be carried forward, and the ways that
I believe it can inform future research. At the start of this thesis, I drew on
Derrida’s Spectres de Marx, which calls on the reader to endeavour to speak
to and listen to ghosts, despite the reluctance inherited from our intellectual
traditions and because of the challenge it may pose to them. When thinking
about what this conversation with inherited ghosts might look like, Derrida
writes:
Or ce qui paraît presque impossible, c'est toujours de
parler du spectre, de parler au spectre, de parler avec lui, donc
surtout de faire ou de laisser parler un esprit402
Building on from Derrida’s vision of haunting, I went on to explore Colin
Davis’s understanding of the spectral. As part of a more expansive reengagement with hauntology, Davis positions an understanding of haunting
not simply as a means of taking part in an active conversation (or a literal
exchange of words) but rather as a process of understanding, or dismantling,
pre-conceived ideas. He suggests:
Conversing with spectres is not undertaken in the expectation that
they will reveal some secret, shameful or otherwise. Rather, it may
402

Derrida, p. 32 (emphasis in original).

247



open us up to the experience of secrecy as such: an essential
unknowing which underlies and may undermine what we think we
know.403
Davis’s dismissal of an idea of shame, or fear, in relation to haunting is
something that has steered much of my understanding (and analysis) of the
spectral throughout my analysis. Similarly, in his consideration of Marx’s
Purloined Letter, Fredric Jameson posits a novel means of understanding
spectral haunting that synthesises the perspectives put forward by both
Derrida and Davis respectively. His vision of spectrality — and by extension
haunting — is one that moves away from an image of ghosts as autonomous
spirits in search of vengeance. Crucially, instead, Jameson posits a nuanced
understanding of what it means to be haunted that seeks to consciously
break away from a rigid or monolithic view of ghosts. Haunting, in this
instance, becomes a means of destabilising the permanence of the present
or of introducing new perspectives into it. To be haunted, as he suggests, is
therefore not so much about ghosts individually but a present that carries a
trace of unrest: a sense that the crimes of the past cannot be severed or
separated from a present-day lived reality. He writes:
Spectrality does not involve the conviction that ghosts exist or that
the past (and maybe even the future) is still very much alive and at
work, within the living present: all it says, if it can be thought to
speak, is that the living present is scarcely as self-sufficient as it
claims to be; that we would do well not to count on its density and
solidity, which might, under exceptional circumstances, betray us.404
Jameson’s thinking about the role that spectral haunting can play in our
present day lives reinforces much of my understanding about how we need
403
404

Davis, p. 375.
Fredric Jameson, ‘Marx's Purloined Letter’, New Left Review 1 (2009), 26–67 (p. 39).

248



to re-frame our engagement with colonial history in future research projects
and beyond. By understanding haunting as a process of challenging
understanding and events in the living present as he implores us to, I argue
that we can consequently be more open to alternative understandings of
history and voices that have been excluded from cultural narratives or
deliberately silenced by state powers. Ghosts, then, are not so much a proof
of individuals who are no longer alive (although the traces of those lives are
no less significant or worthy of attention), but rather an enduring reminder of
lessons to be harnessed from lost lives that can help us directly engage with
Derrida’s ‘politique de memoire.’405 From this perspective, haunting is less
about fear or vengeance but a symbol of open-ended and unwritten potential.
Ghosts are therefore of a reminder of the presence of alternative versions of
history that exist outside the confines of state-backed narratives, as well as
the need for overlooked voices and communities to be at the forefront of how
that history is commemorated moving forward.
This thesis has attempted to honour and tend to these ghosts, by consistently
looking at how creative responses help us shed light on, and amplify, their
stories. I have consistently suggested that we might move closer to an
understanding of the haunted and haunting realities of postcolonial cites by
thinking about what kind of creative responses are needed to live fairly and
better with our own, and our inherited, ghosts. To expand this idea of
haunting, and to engage with a variety of cultural artefacts in Paris and
Brussels, I have followed Judith Butler’s thinking in my own invocation of
405

Derrida, p. 22.

249



what it means to be haunted or to engage with haunting. Whilst we might find
traces of ancestral ghosts and tap into legacies of injustices committed
against our own or other communities, I fundamentally suggest that haunting
in postcolonial cities must be both about a restoration of justice for historical
crimes, and a conscious awareness of our own shared vulnerability. In
‘Violence, Mourning, Politics’, Butler explains that by undergoing loss and by
coming to understand our own grief, our insights into our own vulnerability
are paradoxically expanded beyond ourselves. She writes:
Something about who we are is revealed, something which
delineates the ties we have to others, that shows us that the ties are
what we are, what we are composed of, and that when we lose
them, especially some of them, we do not know who we are, or
what to do.406
Bringing an awareness of this vulnerability, and of the need to further
delineate our shared ties to the legacies of colonial crimes (and their impact
on present-day urban space) has been one of the central tenets of this
thesis. By engaging with community-led projects from across art and activism
that are concerned with, or are centred on, mindful journeys across urban
landscapes we can come to fully appreciate how present-day postcolonial
space continues to be haunted and how we, as consumers of those projects,
are haunted at the same time. Doing so allows us to become conscious of
the various ways (and means) that we can incorporate an understanding of
the spectral into our journeys through city space, and how postcolonial cities
can become repositories of un-tapped memory traces that offer clues into

406

Judith Butler ‘Violence, Mourning, Politics’, Studies in Gender and Sexuality, 4 (2003), 9–
37 (p. 15).

250



colonial legacies that have yet to be fully recognised or even openly
acknowledged by the state and former colonisers.
I have made the case that ghosts, whether we believe in them or not, can
and should come to symbolise social vulnerability of the ways that lives can
be expunged at will or be subject to pervasive acts of discrimination. They
are a reminder of the way lives are continually impacted by the violence of
the erasure of historical trauma from national memory narratives and
institutional collections. In incorporating an awareness of this vulnerability
into my selection of case studies and theoretical arguments, this thesis
encourages a more affective understanding of haunting and ghosts into our
daily lives. Whether we see them as real or imagined, I suggest that ghosts
and haunting can simply be about questioning the ‘conscious account of
ourselves we might try to provide, in ways that challenge the very notion of
ourselves as autonomous and in control’.407
Understanding the possibility of haunting to be more than just an interaction
with ghosts, or the idea of them, is thus a means of challenging preconceived ideas about the present and memory traces hidden within it. This
openness to flexibility of thought (or new modes of understanding) must be
incorporated into wider conversations about acknowledging colonial history,
encouraging institutional (and disciplinary) focus on traditionally excluded
readings of the colonial past and understandings of the present. Doing so
can ultimately allow a unique vantage point to observe how postcolonial

407

Butler, ‘Violence, Mourning, Politics’, p. 12.

251



memory politics unfold in the capitals of former centres of colonial power.
Through my dual engagement with Paris and Brussels as well as their unique
historical legacies, I have hoped to glean what aspects of postcolonial
memory and commemorative practice can be understood by comparing both
cities. I have also drawn on both cities to explore the sorts of artistic and
activist initiatives that are unfolding in both cities, where there is (or has
been) a historical absence of acknowledgement of the behalf of the state.
Through their observation of, and receptiveness to, the stories and
perspectives dispersed in memory traces across each of the cities, my case
studies testify to the innovative possibilities facing future researchers entering
the field of Francophone Postcolonial Studies. Indeed, through the unique
engagements with present-day urban space, the 17.10.61 project, La
Colonie, the campaigning work of the Collectif Memoire Coloniale and the
Place Patrice Lumumba act as a reminder of how an engagement with
haunting can open up new avenues to engage with history and centre overlooked perspectives and voices across different cities and locations. I
suggest that this openness (and renewed engagement with the idea of
haunting) also sets a precedent for the direction of, and objects of study that
fall within, the umbrellas of Modern Languages and Francophone
Postcolonial Studies respectively.
VI.

Specificities of France and Belgium: an overview of current
postcolonial politics

252



An engagement with my case studies reveals a keen sense of the difficulty of
accommodating ghosts and legacies (to paraphrase Mary Stevens).408 It also
gives us a point from which to consider the shared ties between the sorts of
creative models we can use to engage with a postcolonial present.409 It is,
however, equally important to consider the ways in which subjective colonial
legacies are being worked through in France and Belgium respectively, and
to consider what lessons (and best practice) can be drawn from the work this
thesis has undertaken. My introduction provided an overview of other walking
tours or walking based cultural practices for each city — including Le Paris
Noir Tour, Troubles Memory Walks in Brussels, and walking tours in Beirut
and Guadeloupe — that are using mindful walking both as means of
reflecting on colonial pasts and postcolonial realities. Through their emphasis
on a spectral continuum between past colonial crimes and their haunting
socio-economic or political ramifications in the present, these tours place an
important emphasis on the politicised and political nature of walking, and how
enduring legacies of inequality shape where is safe to move through, and
how having ‘the right skin colour and passport’ influences who has the
freedom to move where, and under what conditions.410 I suggested that the
proliferation of these walking tours in Paris and Brussels is indicative of a
need for scholars within postcolonial studies to dedicate closer attention to

408

Stevens, p. 34.
Stevens, p. 24.
410
Soja, Seeking Spatial Justice, p. 12.
409

253



the role of walking and practical site-based interventions. This thread was
developed across each of my chapters.
In Postcolonial Activists and European Museums, Katrin Sieg considers the
progress that has been made in Belgium on the anniversary of the
inauguration of the Place Patrice Lumumba. She considers that:
In context where colonial history is not consistently integrated into
school curricula and public spheres, museums have become key
sites for decolonising myths of national genius and European
superiority. On the one hand, they model newly cooperative modes
of storytelling. On the other hand, they help legitimate critical, yet
marginalized perspectives long considered threatening to a
consensus-oriented museology.411
In an interview with the Guardian in 2019, Jeroen Robbe, of the anti-racism
group the LABO vzw said that despite the inauguration of the square, too
many Belgian municipal leaders were still failing to show moral leadership
around how colonial history should be recognised and memorialised across
the city. He explained that: ‘The fact they are taking this so lightly indicates a
blind spot that we have in our own history.’412 He continued by suggesting
that ‘the difference is not the size of the horror, but the skin colour of the
victims. You have to change the street names and add an explanation to it,
so that we don’t hide away the past.’413
Despite Robbe’s very valid invocation of a Belgian blind spot, it is
nonetheless important to note that since 2019, there has been a renewed

411

Sieg, p. 215.
Daniel Boffey, ‘Belgium begins to face brutal colonial legacy of Leopold II’, The Guardian,
23 November 2019, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2019/nov/23/belgium-begins-toface-brutal-colonial-legacy-of-leopold-ii (accessed 16 May 2022).
413
Boffey, p. 2.
412

254



focus on the importance of providing educational frameworks to re-examine
colonial history. New history standards are being gradually implemented in
secondary school education in Flanders, requiring the colonial past to be
addressed from multiple (non-Western) perspectives. In so doing, they aim to
‘counter a purely Eurocentric perspective, and to foster postcolonial
reflection.’414 In Francophone Belgium, an educational reform is also in
preparation with the view to put key historical concepts such as colonialism,
imperialism, decolonisation and neo-colonialism explicitly to the fore.415 This
is a stance that the Collectif Mémoire Coloniale has been advocating for
since its inception. In order to transcend a Eurocentric approach, the collectif
follow on from the recommendations of the 2018 Sarr-Savoy report which
requires that non-Western societies be centered and their concerns directly
addressed.416 In so doing, they aim to acknowledge the experience of
migrant communities who have loudly raised their voices lately, counter a
‘purely Eurocentric perspective.’417 As such, the view of these reforms aims
414

Karel Van Nieuwenhuyse, ‘The colonial past in Belgian history education since 1945’,
Encyclopédie d'histoire numérique de l'Europe, https://ehne.fr/en/node/21679 (accessed 12
May 2022).
415
Van Nieuwenhuyse, ‘The colonial past..’.
416
The Sarr-Savoy Report drew on the work of from academics and researchers Bénédicte
Savoy and Felwine Sarr to implement the return of thousands of artworks. See: Felwine Sarr
and Bénédicte Savoy, The Restitution of African Cultural Heritage. Toward a New Relational
Ethics (Paris: Ministère de la Culture, 2018),
http://restitutionreport2018.com/sarr_savoy_en.pdf (accessed 16 May 2022).The document
is a 252-page bilateral agreement between France and certain African countries. The
document is divided into three main parts: 1. To Restitute; 2. Restitutions and Collections;
and 3. Accompanying Returns. The second part, ‘Restitutions and Collections’, draws a
three-step process towards effective restitutions. The first phase was launched on the
report’s publication date and asks French public museums to create thorough inventories of
all the Sub-Saharan artworks they possess, in the hopes of reaching as much transparency
as possible. These lists will then be sent to the relevant African countries. A lack of response
from one of these countries will be read as an unwillingness to collaborate. By Spring 2019,
these inventories should be completed and publicly accessible online. Then, from November
2022, France will be returning all claimed artworks.
417
Van Nieuwenhuyse.

255



to foster among students a nuanced understanding of the colonial past, and a
critical reflection on the complex relationship between the colonial past and
the postcolonial world.418
Similar reforms have also been in place in a French context. For instance, in
2011 the publication of a new batch of schoolbooks focused on the Algerian
War and the slave trade and contains an obligatory module on the ‘Memory
of the Algerian War’. The Sarr-Savoy report, commissioned in 2018 under the
instruction of French President Emmanuel Macron, focuses strongly on the
restitution of colonial-era artefacts, rather than educating the general
population about the origins of those artefacts or the context in which they
were illegally obtained.419 Instead, the report focuses in on the return of
property to its legitimate owners, which allows nations to appropriate their
own history, with the view ‘not to annihilate colonial history, but to allow these
nations, deprived of around 90% of their heritage, to reconstruct a discourse
on themselves through these objects.’420
In May 2022, the French senate announced the Creation of a National
Reflection Council on the circulation and return of non-European cultural
goods, with the specific aim to create a competent body for reflection and
consultation on issues relating to the circulation and return of non-European
cultural property kept in public collections. The proposed chapter was set up
with the view to ‘Encadrer la procédure de restitution afin de la rendre plus

418

Van Nieuwenhuyse.
Van Nieuwenhuyse.
420
Sarr and Savoy, p. 252.
419

256



transparente et de garantir que les demandes de restitution soient avant tout
examinées avec rigueur historique et scientifique’ as well as to
doter la France d'un outil lui permettant d'engager une réflexion et
un travail de fond sur les enjeux associés au retour des biens
culturels vers leur pays d'origine, qui soient moins susceptibles de
fluctuer au gré des alternances politiques.421
I suggest that this sensitivity to ‘alternances politiques’ — and setting a
universal precedent for long term strategy regarding the restitution of colonial
artefacts — is nonetheless an important part of securing a consistent culture
of acknowledgement and accountability on behalf of the state. 422
On the 9th November 2021, Emmanuel Macron took a significant step
towards advancing restitution processes when he met with his Benin
counterpart Patrice Talon at the Musée du quai Branly-Jacques Chirac in
Paris to mark the departure of 26 statues and ceremonial objects to Benin.
The objects were taken in 1892 by French troops from the royal palace of
Abomey, which was set ablaze by King Behanzin, the fleeing ruler of the
West African kingdom of Dahomey. 423 Whilst the emphasis was on
establishing a new page in French-African relations — a theme that was
reiterated in the France-Afrique summit held in Montpellier in June 2021 —
the stance of full restitution put forward in the Farr-Savoy report seemed

421

See: ‘Proposition de loi relative à la circulation et au retour des biens culturels
appartenant aux collections publiques’, 10 January 2022, https://www.senat.fr/leg/tas21066.html (accessed 7 February 2023). It is worth noting that this ruling followed the adoption
of the bill put forward by Senators Catherine Morin-Desailly, Max Brisson and Pierre
Ouzoulias on 10 January 2022 to set up a national expert commission that would be
consulted on any future non-European restitution cases.
422
‘Proposition de loi’, 10 January 2022.
423
‘La France finalise solennellement la restitution de 26 œuvres d'art au Bénin’, France24,
9 November 2011, https://www.france24.com/fr/afrique/20211109-la-france-restituesolennellement-26-%C5%93uvres-au-b%C3%A9nin (accessed 22 August 2022).

257



have been lost, or slowed down, in the two years that had elapsed since its
publication. Macron told reporters that: ‘le but n'est pas de renationaliser les
patrimoines et de se débarrasser de toutes les œuvres venues de l'étranger’
leaving a degree of ambiguity as to what objects might be returned and under
what sort of time frame.424
Although the politics (and scale of) restitutions remain open-ended, the
emphasis on reconciliation and repair seems to be key cornerstone in recent
state politics. In June 2021, the inaugural ‘Nouveau Sommet Afrique-France
was hosted in Montpellier, bringing together ‘Des centaines de jeunes
entrepreneurs, artistes, chercheurs, athlètes, étudiants, personnalités
engagées d’Afrique et de France' alongside President Macron and Achille
Mbembe. 425 By bringing together different actors from across sectors (and
creating financial support for innovation and collaboration in a similar fashion
to the Place Patrice Lumumba artist’s call-out), I believe that the steps that
have been taken by both the French and Belgian states have (indirectly and
in the case of the Lumumba square, explicitly) confirmed my hypothesis that
an engagement with colonial legacies cannot be contained within single
sectors, institutions or locations. Acknowledging the legacy of colonial crimes
requires an incorporation of multiple perspectives and points of view, in order
that historically maligned narratives and voices are acknowledged and
platformed wherever possible. Doing so, I suggest, is the surest way of

424

‘La France finalise solennellement’.
Élysée, ‘Nouveau Sommet Afrique-France’, 8 October 2021,
https://www.elysee.fr/emmanuel-macron/2021/10/08/nouveau-sommet-afrique-france
(accessed 22 August 2022).

425

258



honouring the vision of restitution outlined in the Sarr-Savoy report that
argues:
Can we, then, envision the happy and consented restitution,
motivated by the dual interest of both peoples and objects? Can we
thus think of restitutions as being something more than a mere
strategic manoeuvre — neither merely an economic or political
strategy — but rather something truly cultural in the sense of the
Latin verb colere, to “inhabit”, “cultivate”, and “honour”? 426
To think of restitution and remembering as something that is honour-bound
and collaborative as the Sarr-Savoy report suggests, then it must be
accompanied by an understanding that our engagement with the haunting
colonial histories of postcolonial France and Belgium’s past (or indeed that of
any postcolonial capital) will vary depending on the space we occupy in the
city, and the privilege we have been afforded within it. Our proximity to (and
understanding of) an event will differ depending on whether we are static in
front of an information plaque about Patrice Lumumba, visiting a photo
exhibition about internment camps in La Colonie, or following the 17.10.61
map or Collectif Mémoire Coloniale guides along unknown streets in the
search of overlooked or hidden sites of colonial crimes. The political
undertones of those spaces — the sense of what lives we are allowed to
speak of or not — influence whether ghosts are connected with viscerally or
considered in a more abstract sense. Moreover, I have suggested that part of
understanding ghosts (and haunting more broadly) demands a receptivity to
the socio-economic constraints that see descendants of colonial crimes
displaced from certain areas, as well as the decisions from local authorities

426

Sarr and Savoy, p. 40.

259



that dictate which sites will take on a commemorative function in a particular
part of the city. I argue that challenging what kind of lives can be officially
remembered there must become a vital component in our understanding of
how city spaces come to, and continue to be, haunted. Turning attention to
the specificities of these spaces will allow for city-specific engagement with
colonial history to emerge, and for long-hidden perspectives to be given the
attention and space they deserve. An understanding of this complexity of
colonial memory and the care that is needed on behalf of both the French
and Belgian state: something that can only achieved by a conscious
engagement with grass-roots level initiatives, and perspectives that are still
too-easily dismissed.
VII.

How the case studies converge and diverge

Before I go on to examine the particularities of my case studies in more
detail, it is important to return to the legacies of the 17th October and the
assassination of Lumumba and how they fit into national narratives
surrounding colonial history in France and Belgium respectively. Despite the
significance strides that have been made into obtaining the Place Patrice
Lumumba (and, indeed, in acknowledging Lumumba’s murder at the hands
of the Belgian state) in recent years, the legacy of his assignation remains
largely contained within the parameters of the square itself (and, as I argued
in Chapter 4, is still not clearly represented in the Africa Museum). I suggest
that Lumumba’s absence within what I see as a relatively new conversation
around Belgian Colonial history, or what Goddeeris has dubbed as a
historical lack engagement the colonial past. After Congolese independence,

260



Goddeeris argues that Belgium never developed a strong collective memory
of its colonial past.427 This contrasted with neighbouring countries like the
Netherlands, France or Great Britain, where legacies of colonialism continue
to remain highly visible in the public domain, provoking frequent domestic
debates on the contested imperial past in these countries.428 Belgium was
largely regarded as a ‘latecomer’, both as a former colonial power and as a
postcolonial society critically looking back at its history. 429
Goddeeris argues that there are a variety of historical conditions that can
explain the absence of engagement in Belgium with a critical reappraisal of
its colonial past. He writes that:
It was obvious, for one thing, that the public memories of
colonialism could never compete with the apparently more
traumatic episodes of World War 1 and World War 2. In addition, it
needs to be noted that the country acted as a colonial power for
less than eight decades, during which the demographic impact of
colonialism continued to be fairly marginal at home.
Similarly, as Goddeeris reminds us, the Congolese community in Belgium
had always been small, compared to postcolonial migration communities in
neighbouring countries such as France. Whilst the absence of
acknowledgement of both Lumumba’s murder and colonial history more
broadly has taken years to (literally) filter into public space, the creative
potential surrounding the Place Lumumba and the large gains that have been

427

Goddeeris, ‘Colonial Streets and Statues’ and Goddeeris, ‘Postcolonial Belgium’.
Georgi Verbeeck, ‘Coming to terms with the (post-)colonial past in Belgium. The inquiry
into the assassination of Patrice Lumumba’, in Contemporary History on Trial. Europe since
1989 and the role of the Expert Historian, ed. by Harriet Jones, Kjell Östberg and Nico
Randeraad (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2007), 46–61 (p. 46).
429
Goddeeris, ‘Colonial Streets and Statues’ and Goddeeris, ‘Postcolonial Belgium’.
428

261



made by the Congolese diaspora and activist networks in the five years I
have been researching this thesis alone indicate a sense of receptivity or
openness on behalf of the Belgian state to working and engaging with
communities they have historically excluded.
Indeed, the rapidly accelerating activist movement for recognition of colonial
history in a relative nascent Belgium context echoes Barcellini’s thinking a
memorial context in France in the 90s and early 2000s that saw
‘L’émergence des victimes comme moteur de la vie mémorielle française’.430
The shifts in French memorial politics point to a similar shift towards
acknowledging violent legacies of colonial crimes, but with less of an explicit
engagement with activist demands (as is evidenced by the continued
exclusion of the 17th October massacre). In January 2021 the French
historian Benjamin Stora delivered a report commissioned by President
Emmanuel Macron that is aimed at ‘“reconciling memories’ between France
and its former colony Algeria.431 The French head of state said he would
follow a recommendation in the report and establish a ‘memories and truth’
commission to address the history of France’s colonial past in Algeria, but he
stopped short of issuing an official apology. With the approach of the 60th
anniversary of the independence of Algeria (July 5, 1962), French President
Emmanuel Macron has undertaken in recent months a series of ‘Symbolic

430

Barcellini, p. 25.
See Benjamin Stora, ‘Report’, Ministère de l'Europe et des Affaires étrangères, 19
February 2021, https://www.diplomatie.gouv.fr/en/country-files/algeria/news/article/report-bybenjamin-stora-19-feb-2021 (accessed 14 February 2022).

431

262



acts’ in order to ‘Reconcile memories’ between French and Algerians. 432 433
These symbolic gestures, however, still do not include an official apology for
the 17th October massacre or plans to introduce or erect more prominent
memorialisation of the massacre in Parisian city space.
With the 17th October massacre and the assassination of Patrice Lumumba
still remaining largely absent in the French case and only recently
acknowledged in the Belgian context, what are the ways that spatiallyspecific, creative projects can inform the future of how we engage with
colonial legacies? When viewed as an ensemble, despite their noticeable
differences in form and in location, my case studies reveal a tension between
dynamic social movements and tangible landscapes, and the ways in which
the voices of communities tied to historical crimes can often be left outside of
the walls of state-funded institutions or locations. They are a reminder of the
memory traces that are left behind in the wake of disavowed legacies in spite
of years’ worth of state silence, and they are testament to a desire to
transform this alternate version of history into innovative creative practice.
Furthermore, they allow us to gain an active insight into how loss and

432

It is important to note that Stora’s report received widespread backlash for neglecting a
major demand, which is France’s apology for its horrendous crimes during the colonial period
in Algeria, and its focus on marginal aspects, such as organising joint celebrations and
honouring historical figures from the two countries. The Algerian Minister of Communication
and the government’s official spokesman, Ammar Belhimer, said that Stora’s report on the
memory file was ‘below expectations and subjective’. See: ‘Macron Defends Stora’s
Questionable Report On Memory’, Echoroukonline, 22 Feburary 2022,
https://www.echoroukonline.com/macron-defends-storas-questionable-report-on-memory
(accessed 1 June 21).
433
‘Macron points to “resistance” to reconciliation efforts between France and Algeria’, Teller
Report, 18 April 2021, https://www.tellerreport.com/news/2021-04-18-macron-points-to%22resistance%22-to-reconciliation-efforts-between-france-and-algeria.r1xYN3G98_.html
(accessed 22 August 2022).

263



postcolonial legacies are being worked through in city spaces across both
new and traditional media as well as artistic interventions and political
movements.
This tacit link between haunting and overlooked (or peripheral) urban spaces
unites Place Patrice Lumumba, La Colonie, 17.10.61 and the Collectif
Mémoire Coloniale. Their existence is determined by a particular
geographical and historical placement in centres of former colonial powers
and cannot be severed from it. Their presence in both digital and site-specific
realms allows for the spectral to encroach on the permanence of the present:
destabilising any assumed sense of chronological continuity that assigns the
crimes of the colonial era to a different time and place. This vision of spectral
haunting thus becomes a thread or the fil d’ariane that can tie a digital map, a
square, an artistic venue and community-led walking tours together in that all
of these initiatives are concerned with who feels safe in certain types of
spaces and is able to see their story reflected back to them there. The
individual ghosts of Patrice Lumumba and the victims of the 17th October
1961 massacre become part of much wider phantom swell of ghosts and
guests, of invisible traces always present beneath the surface of postcolonial
present.
Through 17.10.61 we witness the possibility for self-directed engagement
with Rothberg’s vision of ‘multi directional memory’ allowing for individual,
immersive journeys walking alongside the imagined characters whose
testimony draws on first-hand accounts of what happened on the night.
Whilst the physical QR codes that were erected to coincide with the 50th

264



anniversary of the 17th October 1961 massacre, and some of the contextual
information about the history of the night is not instantly available to access
(and requires navigation to a separate page hosted on third-party sites), the
project is characterised by an enduring legacy and relevance for scholars
interested in the 17th October massacre. By creating a space for viewers to
journey across literal memory traces, immersed in the stories of individuals
whose words are still lacking from national and cultural debate, it provides a
clear example of the utility and importance of the State embracing initiatives
that come from the grass-roots level, rather than ones which are imposed
top-down from the political centre.
This ability to elevate voices of individuals with personal ties to historical
legacies is also directly mirrored in walking tours hosted by the Collectif
Memoire Coloniale in and around Brussels. By choosing to consciously
elevate the perspectives of the Congolese diaspora through the individuals
that lead the tours and through the written outputs and press releases put out
by the committee, the Collectif Memoire Coloniale are able to balance spatial
engagements with the city with first-hand accounts of activists and
community leaders in the present. In doing so the walking tours help to reveal
the potential of both mindful and pre-meditated movements as well as
sustained activist campaigning to provide a different kind of immersive
journey to the 17.10.61 project. Whilst the subjective engagement with the
voices and stories of individuals with ties to historically significant parts of the
city echoes some of the immersive quality of Raspouteam’s work, the
collective’s walking tours provide a more structured engagement with

265



postcolonial politics as opposed to a freer, more ambulatory kind of journey
that can be accessed in 17.10.61. Moreover, by tying their tours back to the
campaign to secure a square for Patrice Lumumba (as I witnessed during the
walking tours I shadowed in 2018), the tours are able to create a physical link
between activist movements and moving through city space. When viewed
together, 17.10.61 and the Collectif Memoire Coloniale walking tours allow us
to appreciate the potential of different types of walking activities (and tours) to
provide different forms of reflection on the ongoing impact of colonial history
in present-day space, and they foster different kinds of awareness of the
alternative versions of history that can be accessed through the routes by
case studies provided across respective cities.434
Moreover, the 17.10.61 and Collectif Memoire Coloniale tours also provide us
with examples of what walking tours can look like as well as the different
tones that they set. Firstly, the obvious difference in form between a hybrid
memory map and an in-person walking tour allow for very different types of
experiences, with (as I have previously discussed) 17.10.61 allowing more
scope for self-directed ambulatory walking with less of a pre-defined
structure. Whilst the haunting testimony of Lucien provides a detailed
account of police violence towards Algerian protestors on the night of the
17th October (including corroborating descriptions of police involvement),
there is less of a sense of overt criticism of the present-day French state or
authorities, or indeed the ongoing impact of these examples of colonial

434

See: The Brussels Municipality Webpage and social media where the call has been
launched, https://www.brussels.be/square-lumumba (accessed 22 May 2020).

266



violence on descendants of the massacre. This is directly contrasted in the
walking tours led by the Collectif Memoire Coloniale (and the specific tour
hosted by second generation Congolese immigrant Kalvin Soiresse Njiall)
who, as I demonstrated in Chapter 3, explicitly integrated the ongoing
impacts of colonialism on present-day Congolese Belgians into his walking
tour commentary.435 Indeed, by adding an overtly critical and more obviously
political dimension to his commentary, Soirresse was able to re-orient focus
away from the state-sanctioned versions of colonial history - and expand on
typically condensed version of historical events such as those found in the
Africa Museum. As outlined in Chapter 2, this decision of re-telling colonial
history ‘sans édulcorants, sans excuses/arguments qui légitimeraient le
système colonial comme nous avons l'habitude de l'entendre’ means the
walking tours are able to offset the maligned reading of history in a manner
that — both due to the content and the lack of political representation of
Congolese interests — is framed as being very consciously opposed to
present day municipal (and political) choices about how colonial history is
remembered.
Conversely, the cases of both La Colonie and the Place Patrice Lumumba
Square reveal how the ‘multidirectional’ nature of memory (to paraphrase
Rothberg) seems to resist attempts to be contained in fixed places or

435

The wording from my original walking tour carried out with the Collectif Mémoire Coloniale
in Brussels in 20th October 2018 is as follows: ‘La colonisation c’est comme une valise, vous
venez avec une mitraillette, vous m’arrachez la valise, vous me donnez votre valise, mais
vous ne me donnez pas le code pour l’ouvrir. Les jeunes issus des familles immigrées, ou de
la colonisation toute courte, n’ont toujours pas les codes qu’il faut pour accéder à l’élite de la
société belge’ (Kalvin Soiresse Njiall, from author’s own fieldnotes, interview between Ellen
Davis-Walker and Kalvin Soiresse Nijall, Brussels, 20th October 2018).

267



locations, and requires a dialogue with external groups or different forms of
cultural production.436 Since completing my fieldwork in 2018, La Colonie has
lost its fixed premises on Rue Lafayette, due to a combination of high rent
prices and the pressures of the coronavirus pandemic. Speaking to
journalists from Le Monde in 2020, Attia confirmed that:
On avait trop de dettes, plus de 130 000 euros, et le coronavirus a
asséché notre trésorerie [..]. Le modèle économique, sans
subvention aucune, était fragile. « Les recettes du bar permettaient
de payer les loyers et une dizaine de salaires ainsi que l’activité
culturelle qui représentait de 10 à 20 % du chiffre d’affaire. On a un
budget entre 70 000 et 80 000 euros par mois, c’est lourd. On a dû
payer la location du lieu pendant les quatre mois et demi de
fermeture. Ce n’était plus tenable.437
At the time of closure, La Colonie put out a crowd funder on their Facebook
page urging supporters to help the finance (and finance) a new venue.438
Since July 2020, the venue has been streaming and cooperating on a series
of online events and gives sporadic updates about the future of its work. In
March 2021, the venue announced via Facebook that it was taking part in a
hybrid initiative Fragments of Repair, organised in collaboration with BAK,
and with the support of La Dynamo de Banlieues Blues, located in Pantin.439
The post confirmed that this hybrid arrangement was part of an ongoing re-

436

Rothberg, p. 25.
Roxana Azimi, ‘La Colonie, l’agora de l’artiste Kader Attia, met la clé sous la porte’, Le
Monde, 22 July 2020, https://www.lemonde.fr/culture/article/2020/07/22/la-colonie-l-agorade-l-artiste-kader-attia-met-la-cle-sous-la-porte_6046914_3246.html (accessed 16 May
2020).
438
The Facebook Post reads as follows: ‘Aidez-nous à retrouver un lieu pour, tous
ensemble, continuer les débats, les expositions, les projections de films et les sorties de
livres, afin de sauver l'indépendance de votre pensée en la partageant avec d’autres’.
Source: La Colonie Facebook, July 2020, https://www.facebook.com/lacolonieaparis/
(accessed 14 May 2022).
439
It is important to note that the event was hybrid and La Colonie is not, at the time of
writing, using the premises in Pantin to host their own events.
437

268



structuring and re-birth process (‘La Colonie renaît sous une forme nomade
et virtuelle’).440 However, there have been no social media updates on
Facebook or Twitter since September 2021 and at the time of writing this
conclusion the fate of the venue and any future projects remains unknown.
The current function of La Place Patrice Lumumba remains equally openended, but much less adversely impacted by financial pressure or, indeed,
the Covid-19 pandemic. In May 2022 The City of Brussels announced a call
for projects for an artistic intervention (temporary or permanent) at the
Square Lumumba as part of an ongoing decolonisation of public space. The
call, which stipulates that it is open to ‘artist or artist collective that performs
visual arts, performances and/or installations in situ’ reiterates the dynamism
of Rothberg’s thinking that:
Memory’s anachronistic quality — its bringing together of now and
then from here and there — is actually the source of its powerful
creativity and its ability to build new worlds out of the materials of
older ones.’441
By drawing on movement-based performances and site-specific art to bring
the significance of the square to life for audience members, the decision by
the City of Brussels commune offers a fascinating insight into the way that
fixed, state sanctioned commemorative practice can draw on creative
practice and artistic practice to bring together diverse groups of people.
Whilst it remains to see whether the City of Brussels will use the opportunity
to platform Belgo-Congolese artists (or groups with personal ties to migration

440

See La Colonie Facebook, 30 May 2020, https://www.facebook.com/lacolonieaparis/
(accessed 1 June 2021).
441
Rothberg, p. 15.

269



from the DRC to Belgium), the move represents a significant possibility to
promote new engagement with Lumumba’s legacy and to bring new and
diverse audiences to visit the square. Whilst this movement on behalf of the
municipality is the first public event the City of Brussels has taken since the
inauguration of the Place Patrice Lumumba in 2018, the possibility it presents
to facilitate more social cohesion and understanding cannot be underestimated. As Michael Rothberg aptly reminds us:
Groups do not simply articulate established positions but actually
come into being through their dialogical interactions with others;
both the subjects and spaces of the public are open to continual
reconstruction. 442
What remains after looking at the examples of both of these case studies is
how the accommodation of ghosts (whether peaceful or not) requires active
effort and an incorporation of new creative practices in order for postcolonial
memory to be fully integrated back into public space. Moreover, spaces like
La Colonie and the Place Patrice Lumumba have to work to combat the
weight of external forces and enduring socio-economic inequalities — such
as high rent prices or the pressure of a global pandemic — that make the
processes of commemorating colonial crimes (and centering the right
perspectives and voices) inherently complicated. Through their transition to
(or incorporation of) hybrid and cross-disciplinary approaches to
remembering colonial history, the fate of both of these fixed locations at the
time of writing seem to point to an inevitable breaking away from fixed, static
commemorative locations. The fate of La Colonie and La Place Patrice

442

Rothberg, p. 15.

270



Lumumba at the time of writing this conclusion is one that seems to be
defined by a need to embrace and encompass more hybrid formats and
means of working that have been accelerated by the Covid-19 pandemic.
The fate (and, indeed, the eventual function) of both of these spaces remain
open-ended whilst at the same time clearly subject to memory’s constantly
evolving, dynamic quality. It remains a testament of the need to embrace
techniques and possibility for expression that the thesis sought to open up
through a conscious engagement with art and activist projects.
Furthermore, by centring research methods that place the subjective
experience of communities who have been long excluded from debates
around colonial history at the forefront of analysis, this thesis has embodied
the collaborative and nuanced approach I have advocated for throughout my
analysis of the work of the Africa Museum and the Cité Nationale de
L’Histoire de L’Immigration. It is my hope that this approach will open up
multiple avenues for exploration within Francophone Postcolonial Studies
and beyond.
Leading on from this, I suggest that the uneasy interaction between historical
legacies and fixed space (as has been exposed by the fate of La Colonie and
La Place Patrice Lumumba) needs to act as a clear reminder to evaluate the
role played by state-sponsored institutions — including, but not limited to, the
Cité Nationale de l’Histoire de L’Immigration and the Africa Museum — that
seek to actively engage with colonial history. The failure of the recently reopened Africa Museum to adequately reference or contextualise the long
campaign for the Place Patrice Lumumba is just one example of the difficulty

271



in the peaceful accommodation of ghosts in fixed locations that both La
Colonie and the square have provided us a point of entry into thinking about.
The museum’s decision to exhibit a number of dehumanising statues in a
side enclave (including ones featuring a European missionary with an African
boy above a plaque reading ‘Belgium brings civilization to the Congo’), point
to a lack of sensitivity and active decolonisation of the museum’s all
European and predominantly white curatorial team. In a similar fashion to the
highly criticised 2018 ‘Paintings from Afar’ exhibition at the quai Branly, which
showcased among other works, George Catlin’s portraits of Native
Americans, Emile Bernard’s scenes of quotidian life in Cairo and Paul
Gauguin’s drawings of Tahiti, different modes of representing and seeing sit
side by side.443
Moreover, the inclusion of these artefacts and the lack of consultation with
the Belgian Congolese diaspora point to a need to radically question
curatorial and museums’ practice, as well as the ways in which colonialism
continues to shape the ways we experience and understand the world today.
As Donal Hassett reminds us, the public at large and postcolonial minority
groups in particular ‘must be at the heart of future discussions about what to
do with decolonized cultural spaces. It is they who should decide what form
the decolonized museum should take.’444

443

See: Cody Delistraty, ‘The Fraught Future of the Ethnographic Museum’, Frieze
Magazine, 28 February 2018, https://www.frieze.com/article/fraught-future-ethnographicmuseum (accessed 16 May 2022).
444
Hassett, p. 38.

272



The ‘work of decolonization’ in the case of the Africa Museum and in certain
instances the Cité Nationale de l’Histoire de L’Immigration (through its failure
to adequately contextualise the building’s history in its present day spaces)
was not to lay bare the oppressive mechanisms and hierarchies of privilege
on which colonialism relied and through which it continues to shape the
contemporary world.445 Whilst it can be argued that the concerns surrounding
these collections contained within the walls and collections of national
museums and galleries do not impact the mechanisms of the society beyond
it, the implications of these decisions spill out beyond museums to the cities
and communities that surround them. They once again force us to turn our
attention back to the ways in which both fixed locations and individuals
continue to be haunted by the spectre of colonial history. Whether this
haunting is tied to a lack of recognition or acknowledgement from the state,
an exclusion of perspectives from existing commemorative practice or a lack
of awareness of Judith Butler’s vision of vulnerability (that is to say how an
engagement with grief can open up a sense of a ‘shared we’). The presence
of haunting cannot be separated from the decisions that are made about how
(and where) we chose to remember a colonial past, about the types of bodies
and lives that are implicated in the ‘we’ that grieves or are given space to
have their experiences reflected back at them.
Whilst the tie between haunting and commemorative practice can create
pitfalls in an engagement with the colonial past, it does not, ultimately, have
to come at the expense of meaningful representation of it. As Mary Stevens
445

Hassett, p. 40.

273



argues in her analysis of the Cité Nationale de l’Histoire de L’Immigration, Le
Palais de la Porte Dorée was initially ‘conceived as a vehicle for colonial
propaganda and remains inseparable from it’.446 In spite of this, I suggest that
despite this problematic positionality, the museum still offers what I see as
the clearest way to harness what Claire Eldridge has described as the
‘authority and the legitimacy to speak on behalf of the past’447. As I have
outlined earlier on in this thesis, the museum’s Galerie du Don stands out as
a poignant example of the steps that can be taken as part of a process of
‘redistributing respect, authority and the right to representability’ in France’s
memory landscape.448 Unlike the Africa Museum that notoriously failed to
engage with the wishes and perspectives of the Congolese diaspora
community in Belgium, the Cité Nationale de L’Histoire’s inclusion of the
gallery (and its ongoing liaison and outreach work with generations of migrant
communities), provides a unique opportunity to shine a light on crossgenerational stories of immigration and migration to France and centre the
perspectives of families with ongoing lived experiences of it. The museum’s
emphasis on archiving and collecting testimony to shine a light on the
subjective lived realities of historical immigration to France offers a new
perspective on Stevens’ vision of the ‘“metropolitan context of colonial
legacy.’449 Whilst, as I have previously discussed the limitations of containing
(and tending to) colonial legacies in static locations or in state-funded (and

446

Stevens, p. 246.

447

Ibid.
Eldridge, p. 305.
449
Stevens, Ibid.
448

274



curated) institutions, the example of the Galerie du Don provides an example
of what steps institutions can take to make sure that curatorial decisions —
and ongoing commitments to decolonisation such as those outlined by the
Musée Quai Branly — are able to enrich debates about restitution with an
appropriate re-centering of overlooked perspectives. By putting families and
intergenerational tales at the heart of the curatorial process (and choices
about what objects are displayed to the public), La Galerie du Don provides a
clear example of how an openness to haunting (and the presence of ghosts)
can move beyond theoretical discussions and become part of the reforms
and decisions that institutions are being required to take.
At the start of the thesis, I asked how ghosts, or, more specifically, dialogue
with ghosts through new creative practice, can help us rethink the ways that
history is embodied in city spaces, as well as the impact that history has on
individuals in the present. The form that this innovative relationship with the
ghosts of colonial history can take has been illustrated through my
engagement with 17.10.61, the Collectif Memoire Coloniale, La Colonie, la
Place Patrice Lumumba and both the French and Belgian state has taken in
subsequent years. The emphasis on outreach and hybridity — whilst
undoubtedly accelerated by the Covid-19 pandemic — points to a need to
reach out beyond the walls and confines of state-backed institutions or fixed
venues to engage with different modes of practice and with communities or
groups whose perspectives must guide steps taken moving forward. Doing
so, I suggest, is essential to making sure the correct voices are tended to in
commemorative or memorial work moving forward, as well as to offer up the

275



alternate readings of history that are so central to Chamoiseau’s images of
memory traces that I have deployed throughout this thesis. This position is
also paramount to deliver on the objectives of the Sarr-Savoy report and to
bring about a wider understanding of both objects that are still being held in
Western nations but also (and, as I argue, crucially) what perspectives and
legacies have been silenced as a result of these decisions. As part of their
definition of what restitution will proactively look like — and how this will
impact the cultural narratives surrounding colonial history in institutions
moving forward — the report also argues that the act of restitution should be
seen as:
Indeed a question of re-activating a concealed memory and
restitution to the cultural heritage its signifying, integrative, dynamic,
and mediating functions within contemporary African societies.450
Whilst the Creation of a National Reflection Council on the circulation and
return of non-European cultural goods as well as the France Africa Summit
are positive signs for the future of this re-activation and mediation of memory,
they must be respected and protected at all costs. The example of August
2019 ‘Afrohouse’ party held in the grounds of the Africa Museums (which saw
partygoers dressed in pith helmets, grass skirts, and blackface) remains
fresh in popular imagination, and was labelled by the vice chair of the UN
Working Group of Experts on People of African Descent as:

450

Sarr and Savoy, p. 40.

276



A glorification of ways African bodies, resources, land, the lives of
Africans were both stolen and exploited for individual gain and
national gain.451
Furthermore, the case of the Afrohouse party in Belgium casts uncomfortable
parallels with a decision taken by members Sorbonne University three
months previously to allow students starring in a production of ‘Les
Suppliantes d’Eschyle’ to use blackface over the course of a three-night long
run. 452 Whilst much of the debate in France was dominated by an
uncomfortable preoccupation with censorship rather than how to address
engrained racism, the dismissal of certain bodies and lived experience bring
us back once again to the ways certain bodies and skin tones continue to be
made vulnerable in city spaces, whose perspectives and experiences
continue to be denied care and space within it. The staging of a blackface
place on a university campus that sits less than 200m from the Pont St
Michel and its inadequate plaque, are a reminder of ghosts that continue to
be excluded from institutional creative work, and of vestiges of inequality that
reside barely below the surface.
VIII.

Moving forward: what do we expect from scholars

Given the ongoing debate around restitution and creation of new forms of
memory — or new creative expressions of memory — is ongoing in both
France and Belgium, it is undeniable that a clear challenge awaits scholars in

451

Geraldine Kendall Adams, ‘Africa Museum to draft ethical code after guests wore racist
costumes to an event’, Museums Journal, 15 August 2019,
https://www.museumsassociation.org/museums-journal/news/15082019-africa-museumethical-code-guests-racist-costumes-event (accessed 2 February 2020).
452
‘Polémique, masques antiques et Blackface à la Sorbonne’, France Culture, 23 March
2019, https://www.franceculture.fr/theatre/polemique-masques-antiques-et-blackface-a-lasorbonne (accessed 2 February 2020).

277



the field of Francophone Postcolonial Studies. The nature of our discipline
demands a receptiveness to the dynamic quality of memory, and the broader
geo-political changes that affect the laws surrounding (and the public appetite
for) questions of how we commemorate past crimes. I suggest that it also
leaves researchers with a unique possibility to dive into alternate readings of
history offered up by cultural objects and initiatives that work directly in
postcolonial capitals, but that these readings must be supplemented by
conscious outreach and communication with individuals whose perspectives
have been historically silenced.
I follow on from John McLeod in The Routledge Companion to Postcolonial
Studies, who reminds us that:
Postcolonial studies has the potential to assemble new
communities and networks of people who are joined by the
common political and ethical commitment to challenging and
questioning the practices and consequences of domination and
subordination. Anyone can do it. We all come to things from our
own positions, of course, and we are each of us enabled and
blinkered by the location of our standpoint; but we all have
something to learn from, and contribute to, postcolonial studies.453
He suggests that the intersections of Modern Languages, postcolonialism
and comparativism retain rich possibilities and permit the reinvigoration of all
three fields. As I have outlined in my methodology and analysis of the work of
institutions like La Colonie and the MNHI, by choosing to centre the
perspectives of communities whose experience of colonial crimes have been
too long silenced we can open up possibilities to subvert long standing

453

Routledge Companion to Postcolonial Studies, ed. by John Macleod (Abingdon:
Routledge, 2007), p. 6.

278



colonial power dynamics, providing the possibility to reinvigorate museum
and curatorial practice at the same time.
Indeed, some of the case studies have revealed people working to dismantle
institutional resistance to opening up and sharing knowledge, such as the
outreach work of La Colonie and the educational programme offered by the
Collectif Mémoire Coloniale. Introspection within establishments will reduce
or remove the resistance placed in the path of future researchers, and I
follow on from Forsdick who argues that work in this disciplinary ‘contact
zone’ will not only permit new:
ways of engaging with the hypercomplexity of the contemporary
world, in which, as Claire Joubert notes, ‘il n’y a pas de colonialisme
moderne qui ne soit un co-colonialisme plurinational’. It also allows
us to re-conceptualise the terms and retool the intellectual
underpinnings of such an engagement.454
I lead on from this by suggesting that part of this re-conceptualisation needs
to involve a broadening of the research models (and objects) that we group
under the umbrella of Francophone Postcolonial Studies. Drawing on my
experience of a mixed methods approach I advocate for an openness to
interdisciplinary projects and cross-sector collaboration. As Stuart Hall
reminds us, a renewed impact agenda and the Global Challenges Research
Fund require a bridging of ethnographic and Cultural Studies theory (as I
have demonstrated in this thesis), which in turn has potential to go beyond
reductionist or instrumental approaches and instead put forward an

454

Claire Joubert, ‘Le “postcolonial” à la différence des langues: culture, politique et enjeu de
monde’, in Le postcolonial comparé, ed. by Claire Joubert (Paris: Universitaire de
Vincennes, 2014), pp. 9–42, (p. 12).

279



‘ontological commitment to human beings as cultural creatures’.455 As such,
ethnographic approaches can provide those with expertise on forms of
cultural production and representation with models of meaningful and
collaborative interventions ‘in a world in which it would make some
difference’.456
By following the trails set out by creative and activist interventions in both
Paris and Brussels, my methodology has supplemented engagement with
memory and postcolonial studies from the field of Modern Languages and
triangulated this with semi-structured interviews, observations and snowball
sampling from social sciences. While fieldwork and digital research
influenced by ethnographic approaches have become more widespread
among Early Career Researchers working in Modern Languages, Stuart Hall
reminds us that ‘Researchers and supervisors within the discipline lack
access to appropriate training and support for those managing the complex
relationships such research involves.’457
However, I believe that community-based research (particularly in the context
of vulnerable social groups) will also help to shape similar projects for future
researchers. Whilst this was not available to me given the time constraints of
this thesis, co-creation would form the basis of any future research projects

455

Marion Demossier, Lisa Bernasek and Heidi Armbruster, ‘Teaching Ethnography as
Modern Languages Method: Legacies and Future Practices for Global Citizens’, Language,
Culture and Curriculum, 32 (2019), 1–14 (p. 12).
456
Stuart Hall, ‘Cultural Studies and its Theoretical Legacies’, in Critical Dialogues in Cultural
Studies, ed. by David Morley and Kuan-Hsing Chen (London: Routledge,1996), pp. 261–74
(p. 274).
457
Hall, (p. 274).

280



(or postdoctoral work) I carry out in this field. As Schwandt reminds us,
through community-based research, Collective Auto Ethnography (CAE) can
offer a way to broaden the scope of the autoethnographic approach and
incorporate as wide a range of perspectives as possible into analysis and
outputs.458 This view is corroborated by Johnson who argues that CAE offers
the possibility to move beyond university-trained ‘qualitative researchers, and
thus address the concerns that AE has turned away from conducting
research responsive to a broad range of social issues, social groups, and
subcultures.’459 Indeed, by including a range of invested people to define the
research focus and add to analytic understandings, this approach is more
likely to lead to pragmatic applications and interventions, and open up more
avenues of exploration as a result.
Moreover, I suggest that the proliferation of community-led activism and
artistic engagement with colonial history across Brussels and France is
indicative of a need for scholars within postcolonial studies to dedicate closer
attention to the role of walking and practical site-based interventions. Whilst
the time and practical limitations of this PhD thesis meant I was not able to
expand my focus beyond France and Belgium, larger-scale projects that
explore the impact of walking tours (or artefacts that encourage movement
through sites connected to colonial legacies) will be necessary as the scope

458

Thomas Schwandt, The SAGE Dictionary of Qualitative Inquiry (Thousand Oaks,
CA: SAGE, 2015), p. 25.
459
Bruce Johnson, Eloise Dunlap and Ellen Benoit ‘Organizing “mountains of words” for data
analysis, both qualitative and quantitative’, Substance Use & Misuse, 45 (2010), 648–70 (p.
650).

281



of Modern Languages adapts to take into account the global dismantling of
legacies’ colonial control, such as repatriation of stolen artefacts and
decolonisation of teaching curriculum and practices.
It is clear to me, however, that in order for new journeys in postcolonial cities
to begin they must originate in academic spaces. If we are to invest funds
and critical focus on models of community-led action, or on a working through
of layers of systematic oppression and racial inequality, this outward process
needs to be coupled with necessary institutional introspection. Whether this
be the questioning of overwhelmingly male dominated university leadership
for whom, as The Free Black University argue, ‘Diversity means simply
populating White spaces with Black or Brown bodies, irrespective of how
hostile and demeaning those spaces are for non-White people’

460

The appetite for change within institutions has undoubtedly been accelerated
over the time that I have been writing this thesis. On 2nd June 2020, Leeds
Sabbatical Officer and PhD Student Melz Olwusu set up a Go-fund me to
create a Free Black University to ‘redistribute knowledge’ and place Black
students and a decolonised curriculum at its heart.461 In an interview with the
Guardian outlining her initiatives, Olwusu reminded us that:
Universities hold a deep responsibility when it comes to racism, the
knowledge that introduced the very ideology of racism into our
society was born in British Universities. The Free Black University
exists to re-distribute knowledge and act as a space of incubation
460

The Free Black University, https://www.freeblackuni.com/our-values (accessed 22 August
2020).
461
The GoFundMe campaign launched to finance the project raised more than £149,000 and
won backing from both the University and College Union and National Union of Students.
See ‘Fundraiser: The Free Black University’, https://uk.gofundme.com/f/the-free-blackuniversity (accessed 22 August 2020).

282



for the creation of transformative knowledge in the Black
community. We firmly believe education should centre Black people
healing and it should be free, anti-colonial, and accessible to all.
Leading on from Olwusu’s brilliant intervention, I believe that part of the
challenge both in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the global
resurgence of the Black Lives Matter movement will involve updating
methodological practices so that they take into account — and offset — the
inequalities within our field. It is an invite to interrogate how hospitable
academia is to non-white and non-male people, link it to questions embedded
in theses, institutions of art and museums. Just as French and Belgian
museums concretise social hierarchies, UK academics cannot appropriately
interrogate or challenge structures of oppression if the structures are part of
the oppressing of other people. Part of challenging this institutional inequality
can be achieved through adjusting the means by which research outputs are
rewarded, and also by simply offsetting traditionally theoretical and textbased approaches to our discipline with a wider range of artefacts and
perspectives. It is necessary that this approach brings an awareness back to
subjective experiences, to the way in which we are, perhaps now more than
ever, vulnerable to the whims and contradictions of each other, and how our
lives are, more than ever, in each other’s hands.
Whether we embrace the subjective pull of our own ghosts or approach it
from a more detached view of historical injustices, we are being propelled
towards a reckoning with the alternate readings of history and our own
positionality in the present (within Francophone Postcolonial studies and
beyond). By bringing an awareness of the presence and varying forms of

283



ghosts into our research practices we can come to understand how haunting
exposes the ties between lives. It allows us to create space to understand the
ways in which we are all haunted - subject to different interpretations of
history and the absence of necessary voices in the stories we are told and in
those we wish to carry forward and the need to account for our shared
vulnerability and its impact on spaces around us. As Derrida reminds us: ‘Il
faut parler du fantôme, voire au fantôme et avec lui.’462
This necessity of this exchange might not be obvious at first. It is workingthrough and memory work to be carried between generations, to be taken up
in our wondering about and navigations of new cities and new destinations. It
is communities gathered on bridges in October sunlight, where after years of
campaigning the first sitting president in French history will make a formal
apology for the role played by the state in the massacre of an entire
generation who are not there. It can be sensed in projections of formerly
classified military photos on the walls of community spaces, and in the
discussions that animate the downstairs space where academics, students
and families are brought together in animated discussion. It is the sound
made by the wheels of a cart transporting the statues pushed of an
assassinated yet still lauded president, twisting throngs of people gathered to
watch it take up place in a new, bitterly fought for, home. It is the echoes and
whispers that come back again and again, footsteps that override lines of
movement across the postcolonial city scape, as walking tour attendees are
ushered around a city they thought they knew, led by the descendants of
462

Derrida, p. 20.

284



those who can no longer speak to them in ways that are apparently obvious.
It is traces that can never be effaced: the knowledge that even when
everything, or everyone, else is gone, we are richer for an acknowledgement
of all that is available to be discovered in absence, and in loss.
Talking with and to ghosts itself can therefore be part of a much wider
journey. It is not one, I believe, that is even necessarily contingent on any
real conviction that physical ghosts exist. Rather, the journeys that we
undertake in postcolonial cities- or in response to a knowledge about what
happened in those cities at that hands of perpetrators of colonial crimesshould be seen as a much more universal reminder of our shared
vulnerability in public space and beyond. It is a reminder of the proximity of
stories and experiences of those who have walked before us who we are not
able to physically meet or dialogue with. This process of moving through and
around the capitals of former colonial powers can become a means of
implementing and re-asserting a politics of fairness: an attention to those
whose lives were lost (and their descendants) that has been previously
denied or precluded. It is a journey that, in the end, reaches towards the
echoes of the past without fear or constraint. It allows us to turn towards the
dead with an openness and curiosity. In doing so, we are free, as Thomas
Tranströmer does in the final lines of the Blue House with which I opened this
thesis to search for whatever lessons we find in metaphorical sea swell of joy
and sorrow and in the half-glimpsed shadows of lives that could have
been.463
463

Tranströmer, p. 12.

285



