TOWARDS AN ECOSYSTEM VIEW OF LEGITIMACY OF
THIRD SECTOR ORGANISATIONS



ABSTRACT
The study aims to provide a better understanding of the legitimacy and legitimation of third
sector organisations (TSOs). It does so by integrating insights from contemporary legitimacy
literature and public administration management literature into the context of Scottish-based
TSOs that deliver services to young people.
Legitimacy can support the resource acquisition and long-term survival of TSOs. Therefore,
legitimacy should not be taken for granted and must be actively managed to gain
endorsement, support, and resources from the legitimating environment. However, much of
the previous non-profit literature has tended to focus on the study of dyads, where the funder
is often viewed as the main constituency who grants legitimacy to TSOs. TSOs are complex
organisations because they have multiple constituent groups who may have different
interests. The non-profit underpinnings of TSOs, the multiplicity of funding mechanisms and
the presence of multiple constituents require expanding the focus to embrace these
characteristics into the study of TSO legitimacy.
The study employed a qualitative multiple case study approach to explore legitimacy of four
TSOs with different funding structures. Major data collection tools included semi-structured
interviews with selected organisations and their funding institutions, observations and site
visits, and analysis of relevant documents. The data was thematically analysed. The research
study was guided by abductive reasoning which allowed for the exploration of the appropriate
theoretical framework during the research and identified the relevance of the ecosystem
approach in the study of the phenomena.
The application of the ecosystem approached has allowed to account for the complexity of
TSOs and uncover a range of interlinked processes that contribute to TSO legitimacy. By
embracing a holistic view on legitimacy, the study has provided an empirical demonstration
that in the TSO context, legitimation of TSOs does not occur in dyadic relationships between
the organisation and the funder but requires ongoing interactions with other elements in the
wider ecosystem, the role of which becomes apparent only after the whole ecosystem has
been explored and understood. Accordingly, the study has proposed a framework of the
legitimacy ecosystem of TSOs and offered three different approaches to legitimation based on
the core element, which has more legitimising potential than others when viewed within the
whole ecosystem.



LAY SUMMARY
Third sector organisations (TSOs) play an important role in the society supporting vulnerable
groups and communities. They, however, rely on funding support of others – funding
institutions, state and state agencies, individual donors, and the general public. To gain
financial support, TSOs should be legitimate and credible in the eyes of the funders. Because
of this dependency, much attention was paid to how TSOs may distort their missions when
seeking to ensure financial sustainability, assuming that funders are the primary sources of
organisational legitimacy.
Organisational legitimacy shows that the profile, actions, and aims of an organisation are
desirable, proper, or appropriate with respect to a system of norms, values, and beliefs. It is
granted by others who may endorse and support that organisation and provide it with
resources. This research has shown that TSOs are complex organisations and legitimacy is a
complex concept, and focusing on one or two elements of organisational legitimacy may risk
omitting other important factors.
The study has adopted an ecosystem view of legitimacy, which is simultaneously a theoretical
framework and an operational tool in the studies of a complex phenomenon. The framework
has allowed considering how the organisational processes and norms, networks,
organisational and individual actors, values and beliefs and wider societal systems impact and
shape legitimacy of TSOs in various ways. It has shown that the funder is only one dimension
in the legitimacy ecosystem of a TSO and a “total” of TSO legitimacy is a result of the interplay
between legitimising processes with the funders, communities, users, partners, regulators,
and other organisations and how these interactions are framed by the environment and the
values of individuals involved. It is how these different legitimising processes interact that is
important for TSO legitimacy, and if they support each other, it will strengthen legitimacy at
all levels for them. The study thus offers a novel lens through which to explore and understand
TSO legitimacy.



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
When working on my thesis, I could not help but draw parallels between my doctoral research
and the topic that I was studying because like legitimacy, my thesis would not have been
possible without the support of others.
I am immensely grateful to all who participated in the creation of this thesis – the participants
from the case study organisations and funding institutions who despite difficult and
challenging times during the pandemic, made themselves available, and were extremely
generous with their time. I learned a lot from them, not just in relation to the topic I was
studying. I met passionate and selfless people who work to make the lives of others better.
I am very grateful to the University of Edinburgh for giving me this opportunity to pursue a
PhD degree and the Business School for awarding me with a scholarship. I would like to thank
all the staff, and all the PhD students at the Business School who were my support bubble not
only intellectually but socially. The Business School had become my “home” away from home.
I would like to express my thanks to my supervisor, Professor Stephen Osborne for expressing
his interest in my topic and for all his invaluable guidance, encouragement, and support
throughout this research. I am deeply indebted to Stephen for helping me develop as a
researcher. I am very thankful to my second supervisor, Dr Katharine Aulton for her invaluable
advice, moral support, and encouragement to move on.
I would like to thank all the colleagues at the conferences, and the members of the EMES
Network, in particular, who were supportive of the work that I was doing for my PhD and
persuaded of its importance of this study for others.
I am eternally grateful to my mom and dad for all their love, support, and care for me, and for
helping me live through, especially in the last six months before the submission. I am sending
my warmest thoughts to my late grandma who dreamt of holding this thesis in her hands one
day but left before the thesis was completed. My little family means the world to me. Their
care, support, and concern for me encouraged me to complete this thesis.



CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION

1.1 Research aims
Government responsibilities in the UK devolved to local levels and more general downsizing
have had profound effects on the funding environment in the third sector (Hazenberg et al.,
2016; Macmillan et al., 2014). In many cases third sector organisations (TSOs) - broadly
defined as non-profit and non-governmental organisations operating in and around civil
society (Alcock, 2010) - face increasing competition for diminishing funding from grantmakers and in tendering processes (Kelly, 2007). Studying legitimacy of TSOs in the context of
the unstable funding environment becomes important because legitimacy helps obtain
necessary resources, reduce uncertainty, and ultimately enhance organisational survivability
(Aldrich and Fiol, 1994; DiMaggio and Powell, 1983; Harris et al., 2009) because legitimate
organisations are “more meaningful, more predictable, and more trustworthy” (Suchman,
1995, p. 575).
The aim of the present thesis is to advance an understanding of TSO legitimacy by shifting the
locus of attention from narrow, dyadic models of legitimacy to a more holistic framework that
recognises the complexity of the concept. This thesis argues for the application of the
ecosystem approach in the study of TSO legitimacy supported by the insights from the
contemporary ecosystems thinking in the Public Administration and Management (PAM)
literature. The study aims to show that legitimation of TSOs does not occur in dyadic
interactions between the organisation and the funder but requires ongoing interactions with
other elements in the wider ecosystem, the role of which becomes apparent only after the
whole ecosystem has been explored and understood.

1.2 Policy context
TSOs have always played a prominent role in the welfare provision in the UK (Dacombe and
Bach, 2009; Wilson et al., 2012), however the public services reform has brought the work of
TSOs to the spotlight. The new public governance (NPG) paradigm characterised by a broader
range of delivery actors in the realisation of societal goals and a greater emphasis on coproducing services with citizens, has grown the public profile and role of TSOs in the delivery
of public services (Osborne et al., 2013). In practice, however, political support for the third
sector does not necessarily translate into increased funding (Bingham and Walters, 2013;
1



Sinclair et al., 2018). Despite their critical role, there are concerns regarding the long-term
sustainability of these organisations (Charities Aid Foundation, 2017; Clifford, 2017; Jones et
al., 2015). TSOs continue to operate under the conditions of prolonged public spending cuts,
emphasis on performance-oriented management practices, a shift from grants to service
contracts, and a growing competition for the support of charitable donors, i.e., foundations
and individuals (Anheier and Krlev, 2014; Buckingham, 2012; Egdell and Dutton, 2017;
Milbourne and Cushman, 2015). Thus, the existing literature on non-profit funding has
suggested that a multiplicity of changes in the expectations of funders have created new rules
for organisational survival (Cookingham Bailey, 2023; Harlock, 2019; Rees and Mullins, 2016).
The present research draws upon evidence from the third sector in Scotland to contribute to
a better understanding of TSO legitimacy. There are several compelling reasons for choosing
Scotland as a context for the study to analyse the legitimation processes of TSOs. Different
localities have different politics, socio-economic structures, and demography, which shape
the way TSOs engage in public service delivery (Di Domenico et al., 2009). This devolution of
social policies allows local political agents promote distinctive political identities and forms of
provision (Sinclair et al., 2018). Consideration needs to be given to the implications of
devolution on third sector experiences (Edgell and Dutton, 2017), and generalising third
sector experiences across the whole of the UK is flawed (Chaney, 2014; Woolvin et al., 2015).
Scotland has sought to establish a different social policy, following principles of social
integration, inclusion, fairness, and solidarity (Mooney and Scott, 2012). Important
differences exist between England and Scotland in terms of funding relationships in the third
sector. The policy regime in Scotland offers most support for TSOs through local government
with more of a local focus for funding and activity while in England the focus is placed on
promoting TSOs as providers within a mixed economy (Hazenberg et al., 2016). These crucial
differences impact the interactions within the PSEs and shape distinct experiences of the TSOs
with the funders.

1.3 Addressing the literature gap
Legitimacy is “a generalised perception or assumption that the actions of an entity are
desirable, proper, or appropriate within some socially constructed system of norms, values,
beliefs, and definitions” (Suchman, 1995, p. 574). Legitimacy is a social evaluation made by
2



others (Ruef and Scott, 1998), and is granted by internal and external audiences who may
endorse and support an organisation’s goals and activities (Pfeffer and Salancik, 1978). In the
third sector context the ability of organisations to acquire resources is often used as a proxy
measure to indicate perceived organisational effectiveness and legitimacy by resource
suppliers (Stone et al., 1999). There is therefore an implicit assumption that legitimacy is
associated with suppliers of resources. Linked with this, critical accounts in the non-profit
literature have appeared that in their quest for legitimacy TSOs replace their purpose with
outcomes determined by the funding body (Buckingham, 2012; Kelly, 2007; Milbourne and
Cushman, 2015; Zaidi, 1999). A parallel stream of literature studying the phenomenon of nonprofit commercialisation has raised concerns that the growing reliance of TSOs on commercial
income streams makes TSOs more business-like (Kerlin and Pollak, 2011; Wicker et al., 2012).
Writers in the institutional school suggest that to legitimise organisations will conform to the
norms set by the dominant actors (DiMaggio and Powell, 1983), but as Stone et al. (1999, p.
410) have eloquently put it, “Does this mean that, in reality, most non-profits consider
funders rather than clients to be their true customers?” In other words, they do not consider
the need of TSOs to accommodate divergent norms of their constituents or the ability of TSOs
to respond strategically (Oliver, 1991; Suchman, 1995). Lister (2003) criticised the literature
on TSO legitimacy for adopting the implicit gaze of funders, state, and other actors with power
and authority rather than that of the local community. Yet, the consent or representation of
service users whose interests TSOs claim to represent is one of the key dimensions of TSO
legitimacy (Nevile, 2009; Vedder, 2007) while the alignment with the donors and funders can
neither guarantee the achievement of the organisational goals nor facilitate the satisfaction
and consequent approval of other constituents (Costa, 2011). Moreover, deeply held beliefs
about organisational mission, values, and core practices can be firmly embedded in
organisations and transmitted across generations of members (Salipante and Golden-Biddle,
1995). In other words, in the non-profit context, legitimacy is based on a number of different
key elements working together (Brown et al., 2001; Lister, 2003) and is not solely a product
of the funder-fundee relationships.
Legitimacy is a concept relational in nature (Leardini et al., 2019) because legitimacy is
subjectively created and socially constructed (Suchman, 1995). An appreciation that
legitimacy judgements have origins in multiple sources highlights the possibility that
3



legitimacy criteria may emerge interactively, in the interplay between the various sources and
the organisation itself. Moreover, legitimacy is context-dependent (Drori and Honig, 2013;
Kostova and Zaheer, 1999; Ruef and Scott, 1998). Therefore, we cannot assume that existing
understandings of legitimacy hold across contexts, and a central issue for legitimacy research
is identifying who has collective authority over legitimation in any given setting (Deephouse
and Suchman, 2008). Maintaining the narrow focus on legitimacy as a product of dyadic
relationships between the funder and the TSO risks disregarding the multiple other
interactions and contextual differences that shape organisational legitimacy. An analysis of
the constructs within an organisation’s environment may reveal a more nuanced
understanding of TSOs legitimacy (Lister, 2003).
Despite the calls to examine legitimacy and legitimation at multiple levels – within
organisations, among organisations, and within organisational fields (Suddaby et al., 2017),
the holistic models that would allow a deeper exploration of both the context and structure
of the environment in which legitimacy occurs have been largely missing in the wider
literature on legitimacy. This thesis argues for the application of the public service ecosystem
(PSE) framework from the public administration literature in the study of organisational
legitimacy of TSOs.
The ecosystem perspective has received considerable attention and development in the PAM
literature where it has been increasingly recognised that contemporary public services are
not delivered in isolation by a single actor, but these services are situated within a network
of multiple actors whose direct and indirect interactions form an integral part of a wider
ecosystem (Hodgkinson et al., 2017). Osborne et al. (2015, p. 425) emphasise, “Public service
organisations are now part of complex public service delivery systems where their missioncritical objectives require the successful negotiation of relationships within these systems –
with policy makers, other public service organisations, service users, citizens, and indeed a
range of service system elements and stakeholders”. The PSE is a comprehensive framework
that helps understand the complexities of public service delivery, which provides a
comprehensive, “360-degree view of all the individuals, technologies, and institutions
involved in the creation and delivery of value” (Petrescu, 2019, p. 1734). The ecosystem
perspective thus can help reveal how legitimacy is contingent on broader interactive service
ecosystems beyond the organisation and shift the focus away from dyadic models of
4



legitimacy, typical of extant studies on third sector legitimacy. It will provide the tools to
explore the whole ecosystem of TSOs to identify the elements that play an important role in
the legitimation process.
The review of existing studies has shown that there is a need to address the complexity of
organisational legitimacy in the third sector. The present study aims to address this and
contribute to the literature on TSO legitimacy by applying the key theoretical underpinnings
of the ecosystem framework from the PAM literature to the non-profit setting. The following
overarching research question is proposed:
What constitutes the legitimating environment of third sector organisations (TSOs) with
different funding structures? What are the contingencies of a TSO’s legitimacy within this
environment?
To address the overarching research question, the following research sub-questions were
developed:
1. How do TSOs seek to legitimise within their environment and how do they seek to use their
legitimacy to secure financial resources?
2. How do the funders define and determine legitimacy of the TSOs?
3. What are the factors influencing organisational legitimacy of the TSOs?

1.4 Contributions
The study aims to contribute to the non-profit literature on organisational legitimacy of TSOs
and address the call of researchers to embrace the complexity of the concept in future studies
(Lister, 2003; Deephouse and Suchman, 2008; Suddaby et al., 2017). It does so through the
application and subsequent adaptation of the ecosystem framework from the PAM literature
to the non-profit context. The framework has allowed to uncover important relationships and
interactions in increasingly complex environments in which TSOs operate characterised by a
multiplicity of constituents and norms, a mix of funding streams, and their growing
embeddedness in a complex network of public service delivery. The ecosystem approach has
allowed conceptualising third sector legitimacy as a multi-constituent, multi-level construct
by moving the focus away from dyadic models of organisational legitimacy. It has also

5



extended the application of the PSE framework to TSOs rather than public sector
organisations.
Empirically and theoretically, the study aims to show that legitimacy is underpinned by a core
element in the ecosystem. Accordingly, the study proposes three distinct approaches of how
TSOs can enact their legitimacy with funders and secure financial resources. The core
argument of this research study is that to identify the core elements and how they can
support organisational legitimacy one must explore the whole ecosystem.
Finally, the thesis offers practical recommendations for TSOs to explore their institutional
environments and develop a better understanding of how they can legitimise to support their
organisational aims and sustain operations.
It should be noted that the present study was carried out during the Covid-19 pandemic which
had a significant impact on the study. In particular, the author had to change the focus of the
research and carry out a large part of the empirical study in the context of lasting lockdowns,
self-isolation requirements and travel restrictions. Further details of the implications of Covid19 for the thesis will be dealt with in the methodology chapter.

1.5 Overview of the following chapters
The thesis is organised into seven chapters. Chapter two provides the review of key literature
informing this study. It commences by defining the third sector followed by a contextual
overview of the policy context. It then continues to present the key features of the Scottish
third sector, making the case for the study of the Scottish TSOs, and highlighting the key
institutions, policies, and initiatives in the third sector in Scotland. It then proceeds to
outlining the core concepts of the study. The review covers and compares the different
definitions, typologies, and sources of legitimacy. It then presents current debates in the
literature on TSO legitimacy, comparing different viewpoints and providing a critical reflection
on the existing studies with the purpose of identifying the gap in the literature. The final part
of the chapter presents an overview of how the concept of ecosystems has been approached
in the public management literature, and how it can be applied to the non-profit context.
Chapter three sets out the methodological underpinnings of the present study and the
rationale behind the methodological choices made. The chapter commences with describing

6



the context in which the study was undertaken and includes the author’s reflection on the
influence of the Covid-19 pandemic on the development of the thesis and how it interfered
with some of the methodological choices made previously. The chapter then proceeds with
the outline of the philosophical position of the author explaining how it was reflected in the
development of the thesis and sets out the principles of abductive reasoning adopted in the
study. Because the research is exploratory in nature, a qualitative research strategy and a
case study research design were deemed most appropriate, with four case studies being the
unit of analysis. The chapter then outlines the details of the empirical study, and the key
decisions made with respect to sampling and the selection of case studies. Insights from each
case study were collected through a combination of semi-structured interviews, the
observation of service settings and the analysis of documents. The interviews were conducted
with the Chief Executives, managers, trustees, and project staff of each case study
organisation and their funders. The chapter then presents the approach to data analysis and
concludes with the discussion of generalisability, reliability, and validity of the study.
Chapter four and chapter five present the findings of the empirical study. Chapter four
provides an historical account of the cases study organisations, and the key events in their
organisational history. It then presents the evidence collected from each case study
organisation. Chapter five concerns the outline of key themes that emerged in relation to
their funders.
Chapter six concerns the discussion of the findings and provides an aggregate analysis of the
main patterns and particularities identified across case studies. The chapter discusses the
ecosystems of the case study organisations with reference to the theoretical framework and
compares these with current debates in the literature on legitimacy and public management.
The chapter concludes with the presentation of the main theoretical model with which to
understand organisational legitimacy using the ecosystem approach.
Finally, chapter seven concludes the thesis by presenting its key contributions to theory and
practice and suggesting topics for future research.

7



CHAPTER 2: LITERATURE REVIEW

Chapter overview
This chapter presents an overview of the relevant literature that informed the theoretical
development of the study. The chapter is divided into four sections. It commences with
outlining the definition of the third sector and setting the boundaries of the study. The
definition of the third sector will also be compared with another much-debated concept of
social enterprise. The chapter will then proceed to setting the context for the functioning of
the third sector in the United Kingdom (UK) and identifying the mainstream trends in the
sector. It will provide the policy background and cover prevailing discourses about the role of
the sector in public service delivery. An emphasis will be made on the Scottish third sector
and the key distinguishing characteristics of the Scottish TSOs. The key statistics on the third
sector will be provided. The second section will be dedicated to the concept of legitimacy. As
well as definitions, the different typologies and sources of legitimacy will be discussed. In the
third sections attention will turn towards TSO legitimacy. It will summarise different
dimensions of TSO legitimacy to identify the gaps in the existing scholarship and discuss how
the current conceptualisation of TSO legitimacy compares with the mainstream literature on
legitimacy. The final section presents the main theoretical framework of the study, the public
service ecosystem lens and provides arguments for the application of the framework in the
study of TSO legitimacy. This chapter concludes by summarising the gaps identified in the
literature on legitimacy, informing the design of this research.

2.1 Third sector
2.1.1 Third sector: definitions and debates
In the non-profit literature, debates exist around the definition of the term “third sector” with
some commentators claiming that talk of a sector is unhelpful (Grotz, 2009) and that imposing
homogeneity on the sector may lead to the exclusion of some potentially important
dimensions (Halfpenny and Reid, 2002). The diversity and variety which characterise it has led
some commentators to label it ‘a loose and baggy monster’ (Kendall and Knapp, 1997) as
research has increasingly demonstrated the extent to which these organisations cross the
boundaries which characterise the field (Brandsen et al., 2005). The organisations are
8



variously attributed to being part of the voluntary sector, charitable sector, voluntary and
community sector, non-profit sector, civil society, social economy, and social enterprise
sector (Billis and Harris, 1996; Deakin, 2001; Enjolras et al. 2018; HM Treasury, 2004; Kendall,
2000; Teasdale 2010; NCVO, 2022). The definition of the third sector has been further
complicated by the growing literature on hybrid organisational types, and a significant
academic and practitioner interest in social enterprises (Doherty et al., 2014).
Recognising that there is no “one size fits all” definition of the sector (Kendall, 2012), this
study follows the structural operational definition most commonly adopted in research on
the third sector (e.g., Clifford, 2017; Dacombe, 2011; Kendall and Knapp, 1997; Lindsay et al.,
2014). In this study, the third sector is viewed as formally organised entities which are legally
separate from the state, not profit distributing, and demonstrably benefitting from
meaningful contributions of philanthropic donations and/or voluntary work (Salamon and
Anheier, 1997). This study has a narrow interest in the non-profit organisations registered as
charities in Scotland. Subsequently, third sector organisations and non-profit organisations
are used interchangeably in the study.
Because earned income constitutes over half of the total charitable income (NCVO, 2022;
SCVO, 2022), further clarification of the term social enterprise (SE) is needed. Although the
fact that non-profit organisations have engaged in commercial activities is not new (Teasdale,
2010), the term has gained much traction in the academic literature and received much policy
attention in the UK. As with the third sector, there is no commonly accepted definition of SE.
It is part of a large family of inter-related concepts (Billis, 2010; Czischke et al., 2012; Mullins
and Pawson, 2010). SEs are broadly defined as organisations that combine a social mission
with market engagement to provide services or goods (Defourny et al., 2021; Kerlin, 2013;
Peattie and Morley, 2008). SE is differentially conceptualised across the world where political,
cultural, and historical differences shape the development of social sectors and influence
social enterprise institutional forms and practices (Kerlin 2011; 2013; Defourny and Nyssens,
2010; Teasdale 2012; Galera and Borzaga, 2009). Dees (1996) offered a continuum of SEs
stretching from purely commercial to purely philanthropic entities, and similarly Kerlin (2006)
suggested that SEs fall along a continuum from profit-oriented businesses engaged in socially
beneficial activities to non-profits organisations. In the UK, government reframing of SE has
changed over time to include “private companies with loosely defined social objectives” (Roy
9



et al., 2021, p.7). This suggests that definitions and forms of SEs abound. Spear et al. (2009)
suggested four types of SE in the UK according to their origins and development paths:
mutuals, public sector spin-offs, SEs set up as businesses by social entrepreneurs, and trading
charities, which use commercial activities to support charitable mission or as a secondary
activity to raise funds. It is this latter interpretation of SE that is adopted in the thesis, i.e., as
a SE activity performed by a registered charity. It is estimated that that 72% of Scotland’s
6,025 SEs are regulated Scottish charities and that 18% of registered Scottish charities are
carrying out SE activity (Community Enterprise in Scotland, 2019).

2.1.2 From NPM to NPG: policy background to the financing of the
third sector in the UK
The way social services are funded and how the performance of these services is measured
has been subject to continuous development in the UK. In the last 40 years the funding mix
of TSOs has been largely influenced by the logic of New Public Management (NPM), which is
based on the belief that markets and market competition promote effectiveness and deliver
better outcomes (Kelly, 2007). In the UK quasi-markets have been created (Le Grand, 2003)
where public services are contracted out and delivered by a variety of providers of public
services including the third sector as well as the private sector (Bruce and Chew, 2011). This
also involved the introduction of performance measures and significantly for the voluntary
sector, the growth of contracts as the main form of relationship between actors in public
services (Lewis, 1999; 2005).
Within this model, the role of the third sector was limited to that of a service agent who
provided public services while the state continued to control and set policies (Kendall, 2004).
With the election of the Labour government in 1997 the role of the third sector has changed
(Osborne and McLaughlin, 2004). While still retaining much of its commitment to NPM ideas
(Dacombe, 2011), the policy field in which TSOs operate has been characterised by a move to
a new paradigm of partnership (Alcock and Kendall, 2011; Lewis, 2005) and a complementary
relationship between the government and the sector (Osborne and McLaughlin, 2004). TSOs
continued to formally contract to deliver specific services with the state authorities but were
accorded an expanded role in the shaping, commissioning, and delivery of public services
(Blackmore, 2004) and became a core element of public services provision and reform across
10



the UK and the devolved nations within it (Osborne, 2012). The enhanced role for the third
sector was driven by a new policy paradigm known as New Public Governance (NPG)
characterised by the inclusion of a broader range of actors in the delivery of public services,
the use of diverse processes of service delivery and a greater emphasis on co-producing
services with end users (Lindsay et al., 2014).
The rationale for the increasing engagement of the third sector in the delivery of welfare
services rested on the beliefs in the relative strengths of the TSOs over private and public
sector counterparts. They were viewed to be better embedded in the community and have a
better understanding of societal needs (Haugh and Kitson, 2007; Nicholls and
Teasdale, 2017). The sector was praised for their specialist knowledge and skills;
independence and ability to innovate; user- and community-led approaches; responsiveness
to local people; and ability to reach the most disadvantaged segments of users (Borzaga and
Fazzi, 2014; Dickinson et al., 2012; Macmillan et al., 2014; Wilson et al., 2012). The pursuit of
joint responses to solving social and economic issues became the cornerstone of the new
policy paradigm of community governance and offered the potential for TSOs to expand their
role and participation in the delivery of local community services (Osborne and McLaughlin,
2004). This coincided with an increasing policy focus on the concept of “co-production”, an
arrangement where citizens are involved, at least in part, in the production of their own
services (Brandsen and Pestoff, 2006), which justified the participation of the third sector in
co-production arrangements for its perceived ability to effectively represent the views of
service users.
To support this new relationship with the third sector and expand the functions of these
organisations in providing public services the government sought to improve the
infrastructure of these organisations (McKay et al., 2015). The Labour administration
supported major capacity building programs such as Futurebuilders and Capacitybuilders
(Wiggan, 2018) and the creation of umbrella bodies to support TSOs to develop trading
income (Carmel and Harlock, 2008). These programs aimed to support the capacity of the
third sector to deliver public services and expand their participation in public service quasimarkets by adopting more business-like approaches and focus on the creation of both social
and economic outcomes (Westall, 2010; Affleck and Mellor, 2006). The government directed

11



public resources and increasingly encouraged TSOs to use private forms of investment to scale
up and behave like commercial entities (Wiggan, 2018).
The period in the aftermath of the financial crisis has been often described in the literature
as an “age of austerity” (Farnsworth and Irving, 2018). Various authors noted the implications
of the financial crisis and cuts in public spending for the provision of social welfare. Concerns
have been raised about the impact of the subsequent public spending cuts on the voluntary
sector in the UK. Charities were believed to face a “perfect storm” (Clifford, 2017) of growing
demand for their services in the context of declining income (Taylor et al., 2012). Studies
suggested that the impact on the voluntary sector was more pronounced in more deprived
local areas (Jones et al., 2016). Most significantly, local authorities in urban areas and rural
areas, which account for the majority of public sector funding of the third sector (SCVO, 2022)
have experienced budget cuts of 5% and 4% annually (Fahy et al., 2023) and bigger cuts to
many public services were confirmed for the 2023/24 Scottish budget (Philipps et al., 2022).
There are, however, significant cross-sectoral variations within the UK where the nation-state
comprises sub-state nations with distinct histories, identities, and cultures (Keating, 1997).
The socio-political divergences between Scotland and England have led to different
development paths of the third sector and different third sector ecosystems (Hazenberg et
al., 2016).

2.1.3 Scottish third sector: divergence and devolution
Egdell and Dutton (2017) suggests that the research on the third sector should consider the
impact of devolution on third sector experiences and account for the social policy divergence
among the devolved administrations. Generalising policy trends across national levels in the
UK, thus, would be inaccurate (Chaney, 2012; Woolvin et al., 2015).
Since 1999 Scottish Executive (from 2007 the Scottish Government) has a devolved
responsibility to set the third sector policy in Scotland (Alcock, 2009). Scotland has long sought
to be “different” in social policy terms, embracing the principles of social inclusion, fairness,
and solidarity into its policy agenda (Law and Mooney, 2012). The Scottish National Party
(SNP) Government in Scotland used their devolved powers to diverge from what they
perceived as the more commercialised approach to social innovation and emphasized the

12



principles of community orientation and solidarity as the basis of Scottish social policy
(Hazenberg et al., 2016).
Historically, Scottish TSOs have their roots in the cooperative movement, rooted in the social
economy and community business principles, and were also influenced by European social
economy actors who emphasised collaborative, inclusive policymaking (McMullin et al.,
2021). Scotland has established its own third sector infrastructure using its devolved
responsibilities. There is the separate Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations (SCVO),
and the Scottish Social Enterprise Coalition1 (Osborne and Super, 2010). Since the SNP came
to power in 2007 the Scottish Government has embarked on promoting the concept of SE and
have proclaimed Scotland as “the most supportive environment in the world for social
enterprise” (Roy et al., 2015). Scottish Government has introduced its own Scotland’s Social
Enterprise Strategy 2016-2026 and the action plan which outlines that “Our ambition is for
social enterprises to achieve their optimal scale and impact” (Scottish Government, 2016,
p.10). Various support agencies were established to support the SE sector in Scotland
including Social Enterprise Scotland, the Social Entrepreneurs Network for Scotland
(Senscot2), the Social Enterprise Academy, Social Firms Scotland, the Development Trust
Association for Scotland, the Community Business Network for Scotland, Community
Enterprise in Scotland, and Co-operative Development Scotland. Scottish Government
introduced financial support programs to assist SE growth and sustainability but because of
the different political cultures between Scotland and England, the SE sector in Scotland tends
to lean towards grant and community forms of finance (Hazenberg et al., 2016). In England,
the focus has been more on the provision of repayable forms of funding (Wiggan, 2018).
However, as some authors suggested there could be some factors that may prevent the
policies form becoming too divergent. Overall policy direction may not be as distinct as
suggested by the rhetoric (Edgell and Dutton, 2017). While some policies such as
employability are a reserved responsibility of the UK government, health, community
regeneration and adult learning are devolved responsibilities (Lindsay et al., 2014), and

1

Originallly incorporated in 2005 as the “Scottish Social Enterprise Coalition”, it rebranded at the end of 2011
as “Social Enterprise Scotland” (Social Enterprise Scotland, 2019).
2
In June 2020 Senscot merged with Social Firms Scotland and became SENScot. In June 2022 SENScot ceased
its operations following Scottish Government’s decision to remove government funding (SENScot, 2022).

13



therefore divergence is more likely in policy areas where the devolved governments have
more autonomy (Viebrock, 2009).
It is acknowledged that contractualization and the mixed economy of service provision is less
prevalent in Scotland compared with England (Watts, 2006; Alcock, 2009; 2012; Chaney and
Wincott, 2014). Scottish third sector did not fully embrace the idea of quasi-markets
envisioned by the policymakers in England and the differences in the traditions to third sector
policy resulted in fewer opportunities for TSOs in Scotland to bid for large-scale public sector
contracts (Mason et al., 2019). The most significant difference between England and Scotland
is in terms of the role local government plays in the provision of funding for TSOs. In Scotland,
the third sector receives much of its public funding from the local government as a result of a
Concordat with the Confederation of Scottish Local Authorities under which grants and other
funding for TSOs was largely transferred to local authorities (Di Domenico et al., 2009). This
resulted in the policy regime in Scotland that provides most support to the third sector
through local government, including the provision of funding while in England TSOs are
promoted as providers of public services within a mixed economy (Alcock, 2009). This resulted
in a larger dependence of the Scottish third sector on government support than in England
(Hazenberg et al., 2016).
Despite the different governance and delivery structures, the Scottish National Party has
maintained the partnership discourse between the third sector and the government (Fyfe et
al., 2006; Lindsay et al., 2014). The third sector is envisioned as a major partner in policy
development, a key provider of social services, and a promoter of social justice (McMullin et
al., 2021). As in England, Scotland has its own Compact which serves as a framework guiding
state and sector relations. Scottish Concordat and legislation such as the Local Government
in Scotland Act 2003 support the inclusion of the third sector in local community planning and
the participation in public service delivery (Lloyd and Peel, 2006). Later the Christie
Commission on public service transformation in Scotland re-emphasised the third sector as a
critical partner in the reform of public service delivery (Christie Commission, 2011).
In summary, different localities have different politics, socio-economic structures, and
demography, which influence the shaping of the third sector. As in England, the third sector
in Scotland has received significant policy attention. However, while Scotland and England
both promote a discourse about the partnership between the third sector and the state in
14



public service delivery, the political and organisational level features of the Scottish third
sector are distinct from that in England. The logic of the Scottish TSOs is rooted in community
forms of organising, and Scottish Government’s tendency to develop policies divergent from
Westminster, coupled with the importance of local authorities in the funding arrangements
for TSOs have led to a distinct ecosystem of TSOs. As the types of support are shaped by the
differing political and socio-economic factors present in both sectors, both ecosystems of
support are seemingly diverging, with the Scottish sector reliant on grant and community
forms of financing and the English sector seeking repayable sources of finance.

2.1.4 Scottish third sector key statistics
There are over 25,000 charities on the Scottish Charity Register (Office of the Scottish Charity
Regulator [OSCR], 2022). Most charities in Scotland operate within a single local authority
area (63%), and the most common charitable activity by the number of charities is social
service provision (one third), followed by culture and sport (one fifth).
Total income of the sector in Scotland in 2021 was £8.5bln but funding is concentrated in a
few large organisations (80% of all funding going to the largest charities that make up 3.5% of
the sector) (SCVO, 2022). 25% of income comes from the public sector contracts, 20% from
public sector grants, 21% is rental income (mostly housing), 5% from grant making trusts, and
the remainder 20% from a combination of trading, fundraising and donations. Trading
constitutes only 3% of the sector income. These statistics show that only one-third of the
charities’ income is made up of charitable grants and donations, and the public sector remains
the main source of income for Scottish charities (45%). This figure for the public sector income
in Scotland is still higher than the corresponding UK average of 26% (NCVO, 2022) confirming
that the third sector in Scotland is more extensively funded by the government than in
England (Alcock, 2010).
Most public support for the sector in Scotland is in practice provided by local government:
half of all public funding is from local authorities. However, within the sector there are
significant variations of income by organisational size. Public sector income makes up twothirds of income for large charities (£1m and above), 56% for medium (£100k-1m) and only
24% for small (under £100k). For large charities, public contracts are the main source of
income (40%) while public grants are the main form of public sector income for medium and
15



small charities. Grants from trusts and other charitable organisations make up 13% of the
income of medium and small charities.

2.2 Legitimacy
This section introduces the concept of legitimacy because it is a fundamental concept of this
study. It will provide a definition of the concept and outline why it matters. It will cover the
different dimensions or typologies of legitimacy developed in the literature and outline the
audiences who grant legitimacy.

2.2.1 What is legitimacy?
Legitimacy is a fundamental concept of organisational institutionalism (Singh et al., 1986). The
concept was first introduced by Weber (1921) and later developed in organisational studies
(Johnson et al., 2006; Ruef and Scott, 1998; Suchman, 1995). Weber suggested that social
action is guided by a model of a legitimate order, a set of “determinable maxims”, and
suggested that legitimacy arises as a result of conformity with general social norms and formal
laws. Meyer and Rowan (1977) adopted Weber’s ideas in their work on institutional theory
and viewed “legitimacy” and “resources” as synonymous. They suggested that organisations
survive not only by being efficient but also by conforming to institutionalized rules and
schemes in the organisational environment. They also noted that legitimacy protects the
organisation from variations in technical performance. Later Meyer and Scott (1983)
discussed legitimacy in terms of the cognitive aspects as an extent to which established
cultural accounts provide explanations for the existence and functioning of an organisation.
Hirsch and Andrews (1984) in turn elaborated on threats to legitimacy and differentiated
between performance challenges and value challenges. Performance challenges occur when
organisations fail to deliver their purpose or function while value challenges concern
questions by stakeholders about the underlying organisational practices or its fundamental
values.
Legitimacy matters because it entails consequences. Legitimacy has a clear effect on social
and economic exchange because most stakeholders will only engage with legitimate
organisations (Baum and Oliver, 1991; 1992; Deephouse et al., 2017; Suchman, 1995; Scott,
1995; Singh et al., 1986). Institutionalists have found that legitimacy enhances organisational

16



survival. For example, a classic work by Baum and Oliver (1991) found that on legitimacy
(measured by endorsements and inter-organisational relationships) increased survival rates
among Toronto non-profits and was linked with reduced exit rates for US hospitals (Ruef and
Scott, 1998). Early institutionalists also proposed that legitimate status is an essential
condition for easier access to resources (Brown, 1998; Deephouse, 1996). Importantly, in the
non-profit context, funders and donors are not the ultimate consumers of non-profit outputs
and cannot judge organisational outcomes directly, and there should be reliance on
legitimacy, reputation, and norms as indicators of output quality (Bielefeld, 1992).
The current interest in organisational legitimacy is believed to be spurred by two influential
works of Suchman (1995) and Scott (1995) who developed detailed accounts of organisational
legitimacy (Deephouse et al., 2017). Scott (1995) viewed legitimacy as a condition reflecting
cultural alignment, normative support, or consonance with relevant rules or laws. Suchman
(1995) observed that despite growing theoretical apparatus, studies on legitimacy had a
limited focus in certain aspects of the concept. He suggested the definition of legitimacy
which has come to be most cited in the literature:
Legitimacy is a generalised perception or assumption that the actions of an entity are
desirable, proper, or appropriate within some socially constructed system of norms,
values, beliefs, and definitions. (Suchman, 1995, p. 574)
Within this definition Suchman (1995) brought together two basic perspectives: an
institutional view and a strategic view. The institutional lens explains how cultural
environments and societal beliefs affect and constrain organisational actors and activities,
while the strategic lens emphasises the agentic role of organisations and the approaches to
enhance the perceptions of propriety of their legitimating environment. This view was echoed
by Scott (1995) who used Gidden’s structuration theory to suggest that all actors, whether
individual or collective possess a degree of agency as they engage in creating and following
rules but whose actions are simultaneously constrained by the social rules.
Since then, other definitions of legitimacy and its classifications were proposed. In their
comprehensive review of the literature on legitimacy, Suddaby et al. (2017) suggested that
most studies assume that legitimacy occurs through a degree of fit between an organisation
and its environmental context, and consequently the focus of these studies is on
understanding how organisations create and maintain congruence between internal
17



organisational attributes and the external environment. These studies adopt a contingency
view of how legitimacy is constructed and explore the material manifestations of legitimacy
in an organisation (structure, products, and routines) and their fit with the normative
expectations of the external environment (Dowling and Pfeffer, 1975; Ruef and Scott, 1998;
Scott, 1995; Suchman, 1995; Zimmerman and Zeitz, 2002).
Suddaby et al. (2017) suggested that the popularity of the concept resulted in its wide
interpretation and encouraged researchers to enhance the construct clarity in their research.
Bitektine (2011), for example, proposed to differentiate between legitimacy as a property
conferred on an organisation by its audiences and legitimation, which was defined as the
process of social construction of legitimacy based on discursive strategies and collective
action. The studies that conceptualise legitimacy as a process constitute a separate strand of
literature. These studies tend to use the term “rhetoric” (Suddaby and Greenwood, 2005) to
emphasize the purposeful use of language to construct legitimacy. Suddaby and Greenwood,
for example, identified five rhetorical strategies used to demonstrate how a new
organisational form was legitimated in the professions. These studies define legitimacy “in
terms of movement, activity, events, change and temporal evolution” (Langley, 2007, pp.
271), focus on the dynamics of change and build stage models of how organisations transition
from one state of legitimacy to another (Langley, 1999). Agency or the purposive role of actors
plays a more prominent role in explaining how legitimacy is socially constructed.
This thesis adopts a different conceptualisation of legitimation in line with Suchman (1995)
who viewed legitimation as the process by which legitimacy is managed and achieved. The
organisation is embedded within social structures and relations where its legitimacy is subject
to stabilizing and destabilizing forces (Hybels, 1995). Legitimation is seen as the process by
which an organisation justifies to a peer or superordinate system its right to exist and
continue support (Dowling and Pfeffer, 1975). It involves “both the shaping of behaviour
according to established beliefs about what is proper and the moulding of knowledge
according to prevailing beliefs about what constitutes social reality” (Hybels, 1995, pp. 242).
In other words, from an organisational perspective, legitimation concerns the deliberate
attempts of an organisation to maintain its legitimacy over time and is accomplished by
employing a variety of substantive and symbolic practices (Ashforth and Gibbs, 1990). These
legitimation practices or approaches will be discussed later in the chapter.
18



A recurring theme in the studies on organisational legitimacy is that legitimacy in itself is a
critical resource because it helps justify the role of an organisation in the social system and
therefore secure the continued support of constituents (Aldrich and Fiol, 1994; Suchman,
1995; Parsons, 1960; Pfeffer and Salancik, 1978; Zimmerman and Zeitz, 2002). Hybels (1995)
suggests that legitimacy should be conceived as both part of the context for exchange and a
by-product of exchange. It has no material form and is a symbolic representation of the
collective evaluation of an organisation, as evidenced by both observers and participants
perhaps most convincingly by the flow of resources (Herlin, 2015). Legitimacy is a concept
relational in nature (Leardini, 2019) and can only be conferred from the outside and can only
operate within a specific social system (Taylor and Warburton, 2003). Bitektine (2011)
reviewed the definitions of legitimacy and proposed a more evaluative definition of
legitimacy. Legitimacy can be understood as audiences’ perceptions of the organisation, a
judgment based on these perceptions, and a behavioural response (acceptance, support,
endorsement). The definition is a helpful summary of legitimacy research that captures the
salient antecedents and consequences of legitimacy while emphasizing that legitimacy is a
perception made by others (Deephouse et a., 2017). This study, however, adopts Suchman’s
(1995) definition for it emphasizes the social construction of legitimacy by a collective of
audiences.
Because the present thesis concerns the study of the legitimating environment of TSOs, it is
necessary to understand the sources of legitimacy and how it is granted. The following
sections will explore who grants legitimacy, and what criteria are used.

2.2.2 Who grants legitimacy?
Legitimacy is a social evaluation made by others (Ruef and Scott, 1998). The audiences
granting an organisation its legitimacy are known as constituents (Herlin, 2015). Other
commonly used terms in the literature are evaluators (Bitektine, 2011), sources (Suddaby et
al., 2017) or actors (Deephouse and Suchman, 2008). These audiences that confer legitimacy
can be individuals or collective actors (groups, organisations, or field) who make judgments
about the social properties of an organisation (Bitektine and Haack, 2015). The outcome of
their evaluation or whether they will approve the organisation depends on the set of norms
against which they choose to benchmark the organisation (Ruef and Scott, 1998) and different

19



types of actors use different sets of norms and arrive at different judgments about the
legitimacy of an organisation (Lamin and Zaheer, 2012). If constituents judge an organisation’s
actions as illegitimate, they may discontinue their involvement with the organisation or
withdraw their endorsement and support (Elsbach and Sutton, 1992). Identifying primary
constituent groups is thus vital for organisations (Pfeffer and Salancik, 2003).
Some researchers have classified the constituents into external and internal according to the
type of legitimacy that they render (Drori and Honig, 2013; Weidner et al., 2019). State and
state agencies, other TSOs, media, and society at large decide to attribute external legitimacy.
The other group comprises staff, managers, volunteers who render judgments on internal
legitimacy. Meyer and Scott (1983), Baum and Oliver (1992) and Deephouse (1996) argued
that only certain actors have the power to grant legitimacy. These studies focused on the role
of state who “have standing and license, derived from the organisation’s legitimating account
of itself’ (Meyer and Scott, 1983, pp. 201-202). Other research treated society-at-large as a
source of legitimacy, and public opinion as a reflection of social values (Bitektine and Haack,
2015; Gray et al., 2015). Later research has found the link between media reports and public
opinion and shown that media not only reflects public opinion of the wider social system
(Dowling and Pfeffer, 1975) but media can form public opinion (Lamin and Zaheer, 2012;
Pollock and Rindova, 2003). Studies have also suggested to include groups who have collective
authority such as professional audiences (e.g., lawyers, accountants) as powerful constituents
(Deephouse and Suchman, 2008).

2.2.3 What are criteria used?
Legitimacy is not a monolithic construct (Lamin and Zaheer, 2012). An organisation’s
activities, structure, or outcomes can be approached from multiple perspectives, and
different audiences can attach varying degrees of importance to these characteristics (Ruef
and Scott, 1998; Suchman, 1995). For this reason, the question of which aspect of the
organisation the audiences deem important is critical for determining the overall legitimacy
of the organisation. This section addresses the different typologies of legitimacy, that is the
criteria used by different audiences as they evaluate the legitimacy of organisations and their
actions (Deephouse et al., 2017). In legitimacy literature the different types of legitimacy are
variously called legitimacy dimensions (e.g., Suchman, 1995), bases or pillars (e.g., Scott,

20



1995), domains (Kostova and Zaheer, 1999) and “rules of the game” (e.g., North, 1990). These
are abstract legitimacy-relevant constructs embedded in the ecosystem such as values,
norms, rules, expectations, and beliefs (Deephouse and Suchman, 2008). For consistency, this
thesis will use the term criteria because it more clearly points to the presence of certain
standards that allow the audiences to evaluate organisations, consistent with a refined
definition of legitimacy adopted in the study.
Early on in their work organisational theorists have suggested that institutional environments
consist of a variety of institutions, including formal rules, laws, cultural norms, educational
systems, etc. (Meyer and Rowan, 1977; Scott, 1995; Zucker, 1983). In their seminal work
Meyer and Rowan (1977) stated that legitimacy can result from rational effectiveness, legal
mandates, and collectively valued purposes, means, goals, etc. They, however, embraced the
view of institutions as complexes of beliefs that are rationalized, that is formulated in rulelike procedures to attain specific objectives. This model later termed as old institutionalism
(Scott, 2004) emphasized conflicts of interest, power, informal structure and commitments,
values, and norms, and saw institutionalism as a process occurring within an organisation.
The new institutionalism moved the locus of attention to cultural processes, routines and
schemas, legitimacy processes, and formal structures, and saw institutionalism as a process
occurring in the environment of organisations (DiMaggio and Powell, 1991).
Accordingly, several typologies of legitimacy have been developed in which the authors
suggested the different types of legitimacy that reflect the different types of institutions
operating in the environment, including cognitive, regulatory, normative, and pragmatic
legitimacy, among others (Aldrich and Fiol, 1994; Boddewyn, 1995; Hannan and Carroll, 1992;
Suchman, 1995). Some of these classifications of legitimacy that exist in the literature are
provided in Table 2.1.
Scott (1995) offered three dimensions or pillars of legitimacy: cognitive-cultural, regulative,
and normative. Cognitive legitimacy was defined cognitive-cultural legitimacy as “the shared
conceptions that constitute the nature of social reality and create the frames through which
meaning is made” (pp. 67). In other words, organisations must comply with established
cognitive structures in society to legitimise. Regulative legitimacy is composed of regulatory
institutions and includes the regulative processes, explicit rules, and laws created to ensure
order in societies. To legitimise, organisations must comply with the regulatory system. The
21



normative pillar identifies the domain of social values. Normative legitimacy stresses a
deeper, moral base of legitimacy and goes beyond regulatory rules and cognitive structures.
It is defined as an extent of fit between the structures, characteristics, and behaviours of the
organisation and the norms and values of the broader social environment within which it
exists.
Table 2.1 Legitimacy typologies in the extant literature

Legitimacy Typologies
Pragmatic legitimacy (based on self-interested calculations)
Moral legitimacy (based on normative approval)
Cognitive legitimacy (based on taken-for-grantedness)
Internal legitimacy (with organisation's insiders)
External legitimacy (with organisation's external constituents)
Cognitive legitimacy (based on taken-for-grantedness)
Pragmatic legitimacy (based on self-interested calculations)
Managerial legitimacy (based on efficiency logic)
Technical legitimacy (based on technology, quality, and
qualifications)
Moral legitimacy (moral approval of most members of society)
Pragmatic legitimacy (based on self-interest)
Media legitimacy (equated with legitimacy with the general public)
Regulatory legitimacy (legitimacy with government regulators)
Procedural legitimacy (based on soundness of procedures)
Consequential legitimacy (based on the evaluation of outcomes)
Structural legitimacy (based on the evaluation of the organisation's
structure)
Personal legitimacy (based on the charisma of leaders)
Pragmatic legitimacy (based on self-interested calculations)
Moral legitimacy (based on normative approval)
Cognitive legitimacy (based on taken-for-grantedness)
Sociopolitical/evaluative legitimacy (based on existing norms and
laws)
Sociopolitical regulatory legitimacy (= regulative legitimacy, based
on existing norms and laws)
Sociopolitical normative legitimacy (= normative legitimacy, based
on existing rules and laws)
Cognitive legitimacy (based on taken-for-grantedness)

References
Johnson and Holub (2003),
Zyglidopoulos (2003)
Kostova and Roth (2002), Kostova
and Zaheer (1999)
Foreman and Whetten (2002)
Ruef and Scott (1998)

Barron (1998)
Deephouse (1996)
Suchman (1995)

Aldrich and Fiol (1994), Golant and
Sillince (2007)
Scott (1995), Zimmerman and Zeitz
(2002)

Source: adapted from Bitektine (2011)

Suchman (1995) proposed another influential typology of the concept. He identified three
broad types of legitimacy: pragmatic, moral, and cognitive. Cognitive legitimacy was defined
as the acceptance of the organisation as necessary or inevitable, similar to the prior
definitions of the term. Moral legitimacy relates to Scott’s definition of normative legitimacy.
22



It reflects a positive normative evaluation of the organisation and its activities and is based
on judgments about whether the activity is "the right thing to do" (pp. 579). Unlike moral
legitimacy, pragmatic legitimacy rests on judgments about whether a given activity benefits
the evaluator and is based on “an organisation’s capacity to achieve practical outcomes in its
immediate environment—that is, does the organisational structure, characteristic, or practice
work or achieve intended outcomes?” (pp.579). As such, he grounded legitimacy in pragmatic
assessments of organisational capacities, in normative evaluations of moral propriety, and in
cognitive interpretations of appropriateness. Suchman subdivided each domain further and
arrived at a typology containing twelve distinct legitimacy types: pragmatic legitimacy
comprising exchange, influence, interest, and character; moral legitimacy comprising
consequences, procedures, persons, and structures; and cognitive legitimacy comprising
predictability, plausibility, inevitability, and permanence.
Other common typologies include sociopolitical and cognitive legitimacy (Aldrich and Fiol,
1994). Socio-political legitimacy approximates Suchman’s use of moral legitimacy and Scott’s
definition of normative legitimacy in that it is seen as a process by which the evaluation
audiences accept an organisation as appropriate and right, given existing norms and laws.
Cognitive legitimacy is seen as extension of sociopolitical legitimacy and refers to the spread
of knowledge about a new organisation. In addition to these typologies, there are various
other classifications that aim to capture the implicit notion that legitimacy can be viewed with
respect to the context in which it occurs. For example, managerial and technical legitimacy
(Ruef and Scott, 1998), external or internal legitimacy (Drori and Honig, 2013), and
organisational legitimacy (Kostova and Zaheer, 1999). Internal legitimacy is granted by
internal participants such as employees or managers while external legitimacy rests upon the
view of external constituencies, including society as a whole (Weidner et al., 2019).
Researchers thus have proposed the different types of legitimacy that reflect the different
types of institutions that may exist in the environment. This study adopts the four most
common criteria outlined in the literature: cognitive (i.e., taken-for-granted schemes)
(Suchman, 1995), regulative (e.g., formal regulation and rules) (Scott, 1995), normative
(informal rules, accepted standards, norms, values, and beliefs) (Scott, 1995), and pragmatic
(i.e., individual needs and expectations) (Suchman, 1995).

23



Having outlined the key constructs of legitimacy it is now necessary to explore how they have
been applied in the non-profit literature. In the section that follows the study will consider
legitimacy in the TSO environment. This will help establish how TSO legitimacy has been
conceptualised and identify in which areas more research is needed.

2.3 TSO legitimacy: complexity of the phenomenon
2.3.1 Legitimacy in the third sector
TSOs are established for purposes that are significantly different from the purposes that
motivate the creation of for-profit firms (Friedman, 2017). TSOs do not have owners who seek
to maximize profit (Bowman, 2002) but rather seek to maximize a social benefit building on
the culture of altruistic, society-oriented, and nonfinancial goals and aims (Dolnicar et al.,
2008). Accordingly, much non-profit literature focused on exploring organisational missions
of TSOs as an important source of their legitimacy.
The mission of a TSO is expressed in substantive terms, and it sets to achieve some social goal
(Bryce, 2017). In general, the mission statement highlights a particular social problem that the
organisation aims to address or the positive change that it aspires to generate. It defines “the
value that the organisation intends to produce for its stakeholders and for society at large”
(Moore, 2000, pp. 7). Some researchers of the third sector argue that the key characteristic
of organisations in the third sector that distinguishes them from other sectors is the presence
of the social mission, which by itself serves to legitimise them. They argue that the mission
fulfilment in the third sector is equivalent to the maximization of shareholder wealth in the
private sector (Butler and Wilson, 2015) and as such it becomes the metric against which both
the past performance and future actions will be assessed (Bryce, 1992; Oster, 1995).
Some researchers suggested that legitimacy claims can be based on values that make the
actions of an organisation desirable, proper, or appropriate for its constituents (Dart, 2004;
Leardini, 2019). Edwards (1999) however casted doubt on the idea that TSOs seek legitimacy
by adhering to their value base alone and found that TSOs discussed their legitimacy in more
concrete terms. Legitimacy was seen to stem from their technical expertise, regulatory
compliance, effective governance, representativeness, community support, transparent
procedures, and the demand for their services. Chapman and Fisher (2000) suggested that
TSOs claim their legitimacy on the basis of practical experience, promotion of accepted
24



societal values, expertise in a particular issue, links with grassroots and other civil society
organisations, and acting to strengthen democratic principles and practice. Hudson (2002)
found similar bases of legitimacy claims in the advocacy work of UK-based development nonprofit organisations. These claims were made on the basis of history, track record and
reputation. They pointed to their democratic membership structures and significant expertise
and experience. They also perceived themselves as advocates of basic rights, moral principles,
and values.
The literature thus has shown that TSOs are value-based organisations and as such their
values are an important part of their legitimacy. However, empirical research on TSOs has
uncovered that TSOs view their legitimacy in wider terms, that are not exclusively limited to
the aims that they pursue. The present study acknowledges the role of values as a key
distinguishing characteristic of TSOs and thus will explore their role, however the study will
need to embrace a wider focus and consider other possible sources of legitimacy. In
particular, to answer the research question about the legitimating environment of TSOs in the
current financial climate, it is necessary to explore how funding and TSO legitimacy are
related.

2.3.2 TSO legitimacy and funding
2.3.2.1 Linking funding and legitimacy
Legitimacy may have significant funding implications for TSOs. For example, the studies in
conventional fundraising literature established that a demonstration of legitimacy promotes
organisational credibility and potential donors’ trust in an organisation and thereby increases
the possibility of giving (Lounsbury and Glynn, 2001; Zimmerman and Zeitz, 2002). A growing
body of literature on crowdfunding identified legitimacy as the most significant factor
influencing the success of crowdfunding campaigns (Lehner and Nicholls, 2014; Tanaka and
Voida, 2016; Zhou and Ye, 2019).
TSOs depend on a complex mix of given money, earned money and, to a lesser degree,
borrowed money (Chapman, 2017; Froelich, 1999) and have a diversified funding base
(Appendix 1). The income comes from five main sources: individuals, government, the
voluntary sector, the private sector, and the National Lottery (NCVO, 2022; SCVO, 2022). In
recent years, these organisations have been exposed to increased financial pressures from
25



reduced government funding, a shift from grants to service contracts, and a growing
competition for the support of charitable donors, i.e., foundations and individuals (Alexander,
2000). Because government and charitable donors remain the main sources of income for
TSOs, the discussion will cover the implications of these sources of funding for TSO legitimacy.
Earned income will be discussed separately in Section 2.3.4.3.

2.3.2.2 The impact of funding on TSO legitimacy
In the non-profit literature there is relatively vast research examining the impact of resource
providers (mainly, the state) on TSOs (Buckingham, 2012; Froelich, 1999; Hasenfeld and
Powell, 2004). The first comprehensive attempt to summarise and classify changes associated
with funding mechanisms was made by Froelich (1999) (Table 2.2). All the effects can be
effectively expressed in terms of revenue volatility, goals, processes, and structures.
Importantly, it has been shown that private contributions or “given” money are not free of
obligations. In addition to being more volatile compared to other income sources, they may
also pose a stronger threat to goal displacement. Often there may be more or less well
defined contractual or unwritten moral obligations attached to such moneys (Chapman,
2017). While government funding is seen as a more reliable income source, it dramatically
changes the internal processes and structures of non-profit organisations. Finally, Froelich
concluded that commercial revenue poses the least threat to goal displacement but leads to
more rational accountability practices and a cost-benefit mentality.
Table 2.2 Revenue strategy profiles

Revenue volatility
Goal displacement
effects
Process effects
Structure effects

Private
contributions
High
Strong

Government funding

Commercial activity

Low
Moderately strong

Moderate
Weak

Formalization

Formalization,
standardization
Professionalized
bureaucracy

Rationalization

Professionalized
administration

Professionalized
business forms

Source: Froelich (1999)

The relationships between the third sector and the state have received a significant attention
in the non-profit literature, particularly since when the UK government started to promote a
26



more partnership role for the third sector in public service delivery. These relationships with
the state are believed to have significantly re-shaped the third sector. As Alcock and Kendall
(2011) argued, the mainstreaming of the third sector encouraged many TSOs to comply with
dominant discourses and adopt desired behaviours in an anticipation of gains in legitimacy
and resources. Milbourne and Cushman (2015) suggested that the involvement of TSOs in the
delivery of state services and projects has enhanced their legitimacy, while harming their
independency and advocacy functions. The danger as they suggest is that in an attempt to
gain external legitimacy, a TSO may detach from the meanings and purposes valued by users
or their community. Various studies have highlighted the tendency for TSOs to become more
bureaucratic when dealing with the state (Smith and Lipsky, 1993; Hasenfeld and Powell,
2004) as state funders require far more formalised and standardised documentation,
evaluation, and accountability (Froelich, 1999). They suggest that competitive contracting
does indeed affect the internal structures and action capacity of TSOs as they accommodate
to output control schemes and standardisation (Buckingham, 2012; Harlock, 2014). This
pushes the third sector away from informal and participative types of decision-making (Di
Domenico et al., 2009). Consequently, concerns have been raised that TSOs are increasingly
facing conflicts between the different sources on which their legitimacy is based (Brown and
Moore, 2001).
Constituents may have different interests, and it is possible that a form of legitimacy favoured
by one constituent group will not necessarily be compatible with the forms of legitimacy
valued by other groups (Lister, 2003). As governments tend to focus more on technical forms
of legitimacy that emphasize an organisation’s ability to deliver the desired output (Taylor
and Warburton, 2003), a growing number of studies suggested that the increasing
engagement with governments is eroding the distinctive value base of TSOs. In other words,
the demands of output legitimacy are undermining normative legitimacy of TSOs (Edwards
and Hulme, 1996; Choudhury and Ahmed, 2002; Ossewaarde et al., 2008; Rusca and Schwartz,
2012).
Few studies explored legitimacy from the perspective of charitable funders. The only
exception is the paper by Botetzagias and Koutiva (2014) who compared how companies and
philanthropic foundations choose which TSOs to fund. They found that foundations and
businesses prioritize the same legitimacy judgments when it comes to funding TSOs and are
27



primarily interested in the organisation’s formal structure, professional character, and good
past record. These dimensions are closely interlinked and feed into other legitimacy
judgments of an organisation’s good name, reputation, and public recognition. In other
words, the authors argued that the funders in their sample were interested in normative and
pragmatic dimensions of legitimacy. Nevertheless, the threats to normative legitimacy of
TSOs from charitable funders have also been documented in the literature on TSO financing.
Rusca and Schwartz (2012), for example, found evidence that non-profit organisations in their
studies secured funding by complying to donor demands and regulations. They suggested that
compliance may have facilitated the achievement of the project objectives (output
legitimacy3), but at the same time, contradicted these organisations’ norms and values
(normative legitimacy). Similarly, AbouAssi (2013) argued that the frequent fluctuation in
funding priorities destabilizes the work of TSOs and threatens their missions. Brouwer (2000),
for example, provided evidence of how non-profit organisations replaced their social service
functions with advocacy functions as the funding priorities changed. As funders continuously
revise their strategic priorities, programs, and preferences, TSOs struggle “to figure out how
they might fit in or if they meet the criteria underlying the latest preoccupation of donors”
(Doornbos, 2003). Some authors argue for the dominance of the supply-led approach in the
donor–TSO relationship (Edwards et al., 1999), characterised by a one-way relationship,
where funders set objectives for TSOs to achieve, and TSO have a role of implementing
programs and reporting back on the achievement of these objectives (Ebrahim, 2005).
The literature so far has suggested that funding affects legitimacy of TSOs and that resource
holders have expectations and requirements that they expect TSOs to comply with. The
studies have suggested that this compliance with the norms and rules set by resource
providers such as state, charitable donors and organisations may threaten TSO legitimacy.
These constituents are assumed to be important because they possess valuable resources on
which TSOs depend. In the section that follows, the concept of isomorphism is introduced,
which is the mechanism that non-profit researchers use to explain the mechanism of
compliance and its impact on legitimacy.

28



2.3.2.3 Institutional isomorphism
Isomorphism is a fundamental concept of neoinstitutional theory (Scott, 2014). The core
argument of isomorphism is that to legitimise, organisations adopt the practices,
characteristics, and norms generated by an organisational field (Suddaby et al., 2017).
Isomorphism is thus a process by which organisations conform to dominant institutional
arrangements in the surrounding organisational environment (Di Maggio and Powell, 1983),
in which legitimacy is granted to those organisations that possess characteristics approved by
the institutional environment.
Many TSOs thus absorbed new cultures in an isomorphic process of imitating, or conforming
to, the norms of the institutional arrangements around them. TSOs change in pursuit of
legitimacy (Dart, 2004) by undergoing processes of coercive, mimetic, and normative
isomorphism (Alexander and Weiner, 1998; Hwang and Powell, 2009; Meyer and Rowan,
1991). According to DiMaggio and Powell (1983), isomorphism results in a gradual
homogenisation of organisations working within similar fields, and this isomorphic change
occurs through three mechanisms, each with its own circumstances:
1) coercive isomorphism stems from the state and other influential organisations imposing
formal and informal pressures on organisations dependent on them.
2) mimetic isomorphism occurs through imitation when organisations model themselves on
other organisations in response to ambiguous goals or uncertain environments.
3) normative isomorphism is associated with professionalisation and the rise of formal
education for professions which span across organisations.
While coercive isomorphic pressures imposed on TSOs are largely state driven, they often
exist within similar service fields (Aberg, 2013), and are also exacerbated by competitive
funding arrangements (Pfeffer, 2003). Thus, the competition in the delivery of public services
and for the charitable grants and donations promotes similarities in organisational cultures
and arrangements. However, as Aberg notes not all isomorphic pressures are coercive, and
TSOs may choose to voluntarily engage with the state, adopt normative mainstream
arrangements, and choose more market-oriented approaches because of the perceived
benefits. Tensions arise when these behaviours that apparently bestow legitimacy with

29



external constituent groups produce internal debates among the staff and questions about
normative legitimacy of TSOs.
Milbourne and Cushman (2015) suggest that the risks of non-compliance with state and state
agencies are potentially high for TSOs as they signal untrustworthiness and undermine
external legitimacy and influence over the delivery of local services. In the third sector
literature, charitable donors and funders are often viewed as the most salient because their
funding ensures organisational survival (Bielefield, 2007; Bowman, 2002; Connoly and
Hyndman, 2017). Thus, they are assumed to play an important role in granting organisational
legitimacy because an organisation is seen as legitimate when it is related to legitimate others
(Galaskiewicz and Bielefeld, 1998). However, funders (including government) may not be the
only sources of legitimacy because Suchman’s (1995) definition of legitimacy implies
congruence with “some socially constructed system of norms.” Therefore, the possible
sources of legitimacy are not limited to a narrow set of audiences mentioned earlier.
Moreover, narrow conceptualisations of TSO legitimacy mask deeper questions about
legitimacy – for whom, for what, and how it is created (Lister, 2003). The attention now turns
to discussing these in greater detail.

2.3.3 Uncovering the complexity of TSO legitimacy
The aim of this section is to identify the possible sources of TSO legitimacy. Accordingly, this
section will first explore the relevance of other constituent groups in granting organisational
legitimacy, and in particular it will consider the role of the organisational mission as it is the
key defining feature of organisations in the third sector. The next section will then look at the
approaches that TSOs can adopt to manage their legitimacy.

2.3.3.1 Who are the constituencies?
Lister (2003) has criticised the literature on TSO legitimacy for their conceptual vagueness and
for taking a narrow view of legitimacy. The author observed that studies on legitimacy often
fail to specify whom an organisation seeks to legitimise with and critiqued the existing
scholarship for adopting the implicit gaze of funders, states, and other actors rather than that
of the local community. Yet, the consent or representation of service users is one of the key
dimensions of TSO legitimacy, particularly for those who claim to represent their communities
of place (Nevile, 2009; Vedder, 2007). Leardini (2019) argues that the actors whose approval
30



is necessary for an organisational legitimacy change over time and depend on organisational
characteristics. Community-based TSOs, for example, need to engage with their communities
(Brown, 2002) to legitimate their role because they are perceived as democratic institutions
standing for the interests of their communities (Taylor and Warburton, 2003). Moreover,
Herlin (2015) argues that to legitimise, the support of a small societal segment might be
sufficient and suggests that legitimacy does not depend on the number of constituents, but
on whose support an organisation has. Organisational leaders, staff, volunteers, the board of
trustees, funders and donors, clients, allies and partners, referral agencies and public
authorities (Anheier, 2014; Candler and Dumont, 2010; Van Puyvelde et al., 2012) have all
been identified as important stakeholders of TSOs. Since legitimacy is a concept relational in
nature (Leardini, 2019) and is an ongoing status (Chapman and Lowndes, 2014), the mix of
legitimacy bases (i.e., cognitive, regulative, normative, and pragmatic) needs to be
continuously managed (Suchman, 1995). Thus, a central issue for legitimacy research is
identifying who has collective authority over legitimation in any given setting (Deephouse and
Suchman, 2008).
In their study on non-profit accountability Costa et al. (2011, p. 475) rejected the idea of the
primacy of any single constituent group to which a TSO should be accountable and argued
that “long run survival of an non-profit organisation is based on its ability to maximize the
social value created as defined in the organisational mission and as perceived by the multiple
stakeholders influencing and influenced by the non-profit organisation.” As the authors
claimed, in this sense funders are not the main stakeholder group, and aligning the
organisation’s activities exclusively with the funders’ wishes and aims does not guarantee the
fulfilment of the organisation’s mission and support of other important stakeholders. Moore
(2000), for example, proposed an accountability system based on a three-fold typology of
success in the non-profit sector linking social value creation, support by funders, and
organisational survival. Social value is defined in terms of mission achievement, sustainable
support refers to situations when donors view the organisation as economically and morally
valuable and organisational survival is related to internal capacities and abilities of the
organisation. Thus, these studies argue that preserving the mission coherence is in the
interest of the organisation because the extent to which they are able to fulfil the mission
influences their ability to attract supporters.

31



2.3.3.2 The role of mission
It is likely that the primacy of interests of the powerful constituent groups such as government
for TSOs can also be overstated. For example, Mohan and Clifford (2016) found that fewer
than 40% of all TSOs in receipt of public funding viewed their purpose as the delivery of public
services. Instead, the TSOs described their purposes in terms of the specific charitable activity.
The authors suggested that TSOs feel more responsibility to act in accordance with definitions
of charitable purposes, and a broader conception of the public good rather than a narrow
definition of public service is more important for TSOs. However, they also found it to depend
on who they perceive their major funder is and the importance of a particular funding source
in the total income of TSOs.
Some non-profit writers in the literature argue that the social missions of TSOs become the
raison d'etre and justification for the organisations' continued existence (Costa, 2011; Moore,
2000). Cribb (2005) in his study of service delivery organisations in receipt of government
funding found that staff, management, and board members maintained their primary
accountability to service users and responsibility to deliver quality care. The findings of these
studies may question the assertion that TSOs overwhelmingly or readily accept the goals of
others as their own. Nevile (2009) provided evidence of service delivery organisations in
Australia deciding not to tender when government introduced strict financial case
management of exceptionally vulnerable users. These studies show that TSOs are able to walk
away from external funding sources. More recently, Macmillan and Paine (2021) explored the
public services commissioning environment and suggested that viewing TSOs as relatively
passive and powerless in the face of wider forces is misleading. In their article they argue that
TSOs actively seek to shape a commissioning context.
Practically speaking, TSOs or more specifically non-profit leaders may not have as much
leeway in changing the mission as some of the studies may have assumed. Deeply embedded
beliefs about organisational purpose, values, and core practices can be maintained and
transmitted from one generation of staff to another (Salipante and Golden-Biddle, 1995). Yet,
TSOs may be cognizant of the mission drift and be wary of related accusations of self-interest
and the loss of integrity (Moore, 2000). Some TSOs develop "mission stickiness" which is
opposite to mission drift, whereby traditional purposes lay a powerful claim on these
organisations (Rangan, 2004). In these circumstances the non-profit leaders may not
32



legitimately and easily change the mission of the organisation because they may be
constrained by historical legacies, the strong influence of those individuals who serve on their
boards, and the presence of strong links with their traditional donors (Kearns et al., 2014).
Yet, other counterarguments exist that challenge the part of literature presenting TSOs as
victims of the isomorphic forces. These studies challenge the claims that isomorphic pressures
will necessarily lead to a loss of normative legitimacy. Some of these pressures may in fact
present an opportunity to bolster normative claims of legitimacy. As Lister (2003) suggested
legitimacy depends on conformity with dominant discourses. The NPG paradigm is among
other things underpinned by the claims that the third sector has closer ties with service users,
and hence possesses better knowledge of their needs (Kelly, 2007). Ospina et al. (2002) in
their study of four non-profit organisations showed how the dominant rhetoric of TSOs’ ties
with their community enhances their legitimacy with government and funders. It is therefore
in the interest of TSOs to maintain close links with their communities or groups of people who
are the intended recipients of the services. As further argued by Nevile (2010) TSOs that
address a local need draw their normative legitimacy from their connection with the
community they were set up to assist. As such maintaining that connection gives them a tool
to protect normative legitimacy because the connection is also part of output legitimacy, i.e.,
their comparative advantage over private and statutory organisations.
Section 2.3.3 has thus shown that TSOs have multiple constituents and the fulfilment of their
missions may not necessarily depend on their legitimacy with funders. Moreover, TSOs may
need to legitimise with user groups and depending on their profile, they may need to seek
approval of the communities that they support. This necessitates taking a broader view on
legitimacy by considering a wider range of constituents with reference to the specific
organisational context. Yet, the organisational mission is often the base on which TSOs’ claims
for legitimacy are based, and therefore the role of the mission must be accounted for in the
studies on TSO legitimacy.
Moreover, writers in the institutional school assume that organisations will conform to norms
asserted by dominant actors, but they do not address the organisation’s need to
accommodate divergent norms or the ability to respond strategically (Oliver, 1991; Suchman,
1995). An appreciation that legitimacy evaluations come from multiple sources highlights the
possibility that legitimacy criteria may emerge interactively, in the interplay between the
33



various sources evaluating a given organisation and the organisation itself (Deephouse et al.,
2017). In other words, these studies do not include a possibility that the TSOs may play a more
agentic role in the legitimation process and actually resist some of the isomorphic pressures
or at least find workarounds to reduce their negative impact. The next section aims to rectify
this.

2.3.4 Approaches to legitimation
This section explores the non-profit literature to establish approaches that TSOs use to
manage their legitimacy. This will facilitate an understanding of how TSOs seek to legitimise
with their constituents, which will help answer an overarching research question and
establish the factors that may influence organisational legitimacy of TSOs. Where
appropriate, the section will identify relevant texts from the wider legitimacy literature to
enrich understanding and facilitate the identification of a possible gap.
"Coercive isomorphism" (DiMaggio and Powell 1983), or conformity to the values, norms, and
expectations of constituents is indeed one way that organisations use to legitimise (Suchman,
1995). But Suchman emphasised the degree of managerial control over the legitimation
process and the role of the organisation itself in seeking to enact legitimacy. They can do so
by manipulating certain elements of their environments. Broadly speaking, organisations may
attempt to change the mix of its constituents, and consequently the values, norms, and
expectations to which it must attend (Ashforth and Gibbs, 1990). In the literature on TSO
legitimacy most often this approach manifests itself as maintaining a mixed funding base or
diversifying into new forms of service provision to better meet user needs (Brandsen and Van
Hout 2006; Nevile, 2009; Osborne, 2012). Other approaches to legitimation in which TSOs
show a more strategic role are forming links with other like-minded organisations, and a
greater use of communication-based approaches. While these approaches challenge the
common portrayal of TSOs as passive victims of external environments, it remains
undisputable that the public policy context does have an impact on at least some of the
distinctive characteristics of TSOs. Some of these approaches are discussed in greater detail
below.

34



2.3.4.1 Inter-organisational partnerships
The role of inter-organisational linkages in enhancing legitimacy has been well documented
in the legitimacy literature (Baum and Oliver, 1991; Deephouse and Suchman, 2008; Kumar
and Das, 2007). Organisations may enhance legitimacy through their associations with “highly
legitimate social actors in its environment” (Bitektine, 2011, p. 156). However, the linkages
that may affect legitimacy are not only limited to “highly legitimate others” as Bitektine
suggested. Weidner et al. (2019) demonstrated how inter-organisational partnerships
between SEs enhanced legitimacy of both partners and argued that partnerships per se is one
form of legitimating strategies. Further support was provided by Nevile (2010) who showed
how establishing links with like-minded organisations enabled TSOs to apply and secure
European funding and strengthen their funding bids.
Alexander (2010) found evidence that TSOs’ linkages with others provided them with critical
resources including grants, contracts, pro-bono services, referrals, media coverage and the
ability to influence policy. The forming of inter-organisational ties and relationships with
constituents is closely interlinked with communication that will be discussed next. The link
exists because partnership and relationship building are based on various forms of
communication. Alexander found that inter-organisational ties that the organisation forms
and maintains increase their legitimacy and organisational survival. The author also
highlighted the importance of engaging in boundary spanning activities. These boundary
spanning activities can be fostered by clients, staff, and board members who bring their skills,
networks, and political ties. Active participation in networks allows TSOs to advocate for their
organisation and clients through coalitions and consortiums with other organisations, and
together they are far more powerful in their effect than discrete organisations. In a similar
vein, Lu’s (2015) study highlighted the importance of informal relational governance in nonprofit–government cooperation. The author suggested that to a certain extent government
funding is a factor of an ongoing relationship-building process and advised non-profit leaders
to engage in multiple boundary-spanning activities in both professional and social settings, to
cultivate partnerships.

2.3.4.2 Communication-based approaches
As constituents confer legitimacy to an organisation with reference to their perceptions,
legitimacy is subjectively created and socially constructed (Suchman, 1995). Suchman
35



stressed the role of communication-based strategies in the legitimation process, which were
interpreted in a wide sense including various symbolic actions. Because legitimacy is a cultural
process, legitimacy management builds on communication between an organisation and its
constituents (Herlin, 2015). To legitimise organisations must not only ensure that their
activities are congruent with societal values but also be able to communicate that their
activities are congruent with such values to constituents (Branco and Rodrigues, 2006). PradoRomán et al. (2020) showed that communication systems within a hospital can generate a
consensus among stakeholders, regarding the adequacy of organisational activities. These
systems generate consensus on knowledge, culture, and social norms, which determine
organisational legitimacy, and are achieved through interactions between the staff and other
constituents. Thus, convincing communication maintains a reputation that is one building
block of organisational legitimacy (Branco et al., 2008). Kostova and Zaheer (1999) in their
study of multinational organisations showed that a good track record by itself is not sufficient
to gain legitimacy and organisations must clearly communicate that record to the legitimating
environment. One of the common ways to communicate legitimacy is by media, which
facilitates a general evaluation on the organisations (Bitektine, 2011) and Leardini (2019) even
used a term media legitimacy as means for an organisation to influence the perception of an
organisation’s reputation. However, there are other public discourse instruments that allow
TSOs to communicate with their constituents such as the annual report and other voluntary
documents published for their constituents (Connoly and Hyndman, 2017). This also includes
the adoption of standards and codes of conduct which articulate appropriate behaviour
(Ebrahim, 2003).

2.3.4.3 Developing commercial income
Alexander (2010) found that non-profit commercialisation gives a certain degree of financial
independence and control over goals and organisational services. Instead of damaging an
organisation’s public character, “businessification” could allow the organisation more
autonomy. A similar conclusion was made by Osborne (2012) who showed how TSOs some of
which are “self-styled social enterprises” turned their attention to enterprising and
entrepreneurial ethos to continue to play a role for local communities. Moreover, evidence
suggests that TSOs with more diverse portfolios of donors are less prone to isomorphic
pressures from donors (AbouAssi, 2013). There are however concerns that the commercial
36



activities are eroding the distinct value of the charitable sector leading to a loss of identity
and a loss of legitimacy (Bush, 1992; Powell and Owen-Smith, 1998; Weisbrod, 1998).
The value of earned money is articulated differently from given money. If organisations are
paid to do something, then they are free to spend the money as they choose (Child, 2016).
However, earned income entails some social and cultural meaning, which is measured to
some extent by the way it was earned (Chapman, 2017), and is not entirely “cost-free.”
Non-profits’ commercialisation defined as increasing reliance on revenue from sales of goods
and services (Salamon, 2003) has been another source of a debate in the non-profit literature
(Anheier, 2014). Some researchers claim that the reliance on commercial sources has
increased significantly since the 1970s (Dees, 2004; Tuckman and Chang, 2006; Young, 2008)
with TSOs becoming more business-like (Hwang and Powell, 2009; Kerlin and Pollak, 2011;
Wicker et al., 2012). The diversification of revenue sources is said to be consistent with the
logic of maintaining organisational autonomy (Pfeffer and Salancik, 1978). Others, however,
found little evidence of the overall sector commercialisation (Child, 2010) supporting claims
that TSOs have historically depended more on earned income than on donations (Hall and
Burke, 2006) and that reliance on commercial revenues is not a new phenomenon (Osborne,
2012; Teasdale, 2010). Yet others, analysed the funding structures of TSOs and while these
studies confirmed a large increase in commercial revenue, they also suggested that
commercial income cannot fully substitute grants and donations and that these sources of
income remain as important (Kerlin and Pollak, 2011; McKay et al., 2015).
The debates in the field may exist because commercial revenue is a broad and catch-all term.
It has been variously referred to as earned income, unrelated business income, contract
income, or program service revenue (Child, 2010). Roy et al. (2021) found that much of what
research counts as “commercial income” is government income from service contracts or
project funding. In addition, in practice there exist certain limits to commercialisation. For
example, in social housing the role of the sector and its market share has expanded relatively
rapidly long before the recent mainstreaming of the sector (Kendall, 2009). Regional
differences present different realities for TSOs (Di Domenico et al., 2009) as deprived areas
offer very little opportunities to charge fees for services (Chapman, 2017).
This topic has received much attention in the SE literature where the combination of
commercial and social goals may come into conflict with each other and compromise
37



performance, efficiency, and outcomes (Yin and Chen, 2018; Mason and Doherty, 2016).
These tensions however can be managed and reconciled. Bianchi et al. (2022) divided the
approaches to managing the tensions into two broad groups. One requires TSOs to manage
the duality of goals and have a set of “cultural toolkits” against which proposed practices will
be consciously evaluated. This, for example, might be setting a limit on the levels of profit
that should earned. The alternative strategy is decoupling, which means that social and
commercial activities are run separately. This can allow an organisation to keep services of
fundamental public benefit for free or at a low price.

2.3.4.4 Governance and accountability
In the literature on non-profit governance, governance arrangements as an approach to
managing legitimacy of TSOs have received much interest from the researchers (Connolly et
al., 2015; Leardini, 2019; Lee, 2016). While compliance with legal norms is a source of
organisational legitimacy, it is rarely sufficient on its own to achieve legitimacy because legal
frameworks and societal values may not coincide (Dowling and Pfeffer, 1975). Consequently,
a major part of studies on governance focus on representation of constituents and user
involvement (referred to as downward accountability in non-profit governance studies).
According to this stream of literature, participation, and representation of the local
community within governance arrangements enhances legitimacy (Guo and Musso, 2007;
Leardini et al., 2017; Mercelis et al., 2016). Sound governance implies “structures and values
that mirror a society” (Farazmand, 2012, p. 230). These studies therefore view governance as
a mechanism linking TSOs and their communities and suggest that engaging stakeholders
within their boards usually increases trust in TSOs because they are considered symbols of
local identities (Abzug and Galaskiewicz, 2001) and are trusted to act in the interests of the
community (Guo and Zhang, 2013). The actual involvement of constituents in organisational
activities can lead to better outcomes because organisational decisions are made with respect
to constituents’ needs (Choudhury and Ahmed, 2002).
Recently, however, more critical accounts of user representation as an approach to legitimacy
have emerged. Recent analyses based on empirical case studies have found that user and/or
community representation and participation in governance depends on missions,
organisational types, and institutional environments of TSOs (Guo and Musso, 2007; Guo and
Zhang, 2013). Hudson’s (2002) empirical research for example, showed that most TSOs in
38



their study were reluctant to get involved in time-consuming consultations with the service
user while Connoly and Hyndman (2017) found that discharging meaningful accountability
downwards to users is difficult to achieve due to lack of resources, organisational
commitment, guidance and/or expertise. These studies thus have challenged the assumption
that the third sector can always meaningfully represent the views of service users and
suggested that the relationship between service users and third sector organisations is
contextually dependent.

2.3.4.5 Local milieu: a neglected part of TSO legitimacy
Another important but often neglected dimension of TSO legitimacy is the local milieu. There
is no general agreement on how to define the concept of “local” or “regional” (Malmberg,
1996) while “milieu” is defined as “the physical or social setting in which something occurs or
develops” (Merriam-Webster, 2023). A local milieu could thus be a nation, an urban region,
or any functionally defined subnational entity. Following Malmberg (1996, p. 400), this study
defines the local milieu as a segment of territory characterised by a certain coherence based
on common behavioural practices linked to its local institutions and culture, industrial
structure and corporate organisation.”
A TSO’s social license to operate in local communities requires the necessary work to gain
trust and seek approval from local communities (Molden et al, 2017). The symbolic power of
localism and of concepts like local and community is recognised as a contributor to legitimacy
of rural-based organisations (Agrawal and Gibson, 1999; Blaikie, 2006; Hurley and Walker
2004; Lane and Corbett, 2005). Comparatively little is known generally about how “place”
shapes the development of TSOs (Muñoz, 2010), yet relatively little scholarship has explicitly
attempted to include the local milieu as one of the key dimensions of TSO’s legitimacy. Searing
et al. (2022) argue that both the perception of the mission and of the funding will shift as
cultural boundaries are crossed and suggest including the local context in future studies to
promote a better understanding of the characteristics of TSOs.
In the UK, the uneven regional geographies in the development of the third sector have been
noted previously (section 2.1.3). Bingham and Walters (2013) note that political support for
the third sector does not necessarily translate into increased funding. Mohan and Clifford
(2016) found that by no means all organisations delivering public services are in receipt of
public funding. While co-production of public services may be the cornerstone of Scottish
39



social policy promoted at the level of Scottish Government, in practice it is implemented at
the local level by local authorities. Local authorities are not only potentially resistant to
change (Cairney et al., 2016), but are free to interpret priorities in different ways which
influences the level of funding available to TSOs. This could undermine the rhetoric regarding
the inclusion of the third sector in the delivery of public services (Osborne and Super, 2010),
but importantly, it exposes TSOs to different local institutional arrangements, which must be
taken in consideration in the analysis of organisational legitimacy.

2.3.4.6 Organisational characteristics and skills
Other common mechanisms of enacting legitimacy that exist in the wider literature include
legal compliance (Brinkerhoff, 2005); the expertise, knowledge, and competence of boards
(Abzug and Galaskiewicz, 2001; Buckingham et al., 2014); organisational age, size and niche
specialism (Baum and Oliver, 1991; Ruef and Scott, 1998); performance, i.e., demonstrating
pragmatic ability to deliver results (Ashforth and Gibbs, 1990; Suddaby et al., 2017); and
“creative packaging” when TSOs present what they do in ways that correspond to the
preferences of government (or other) funding sources (Ossewaarde et al., 2008).

2.3.5 Where have we gone so far?
The mainstream literature on TSO legitimacy has been concerned mainly with the actor–
audience dyads and focused on one or two “important” constituents such as government (as
both the funder and rule setter) and funding agencies. It assumed that the funders are more
salient than others because of the TSO’s dependence on external funding and neglected other
important actors and elements in a wider intuitional setting that bear relevance for legitimacy
such as organisational values, mission and norms, and individual beliefs. With the growing
focus on involving TSOs as partners in the delivery of public services spurred by the rise of
NPG and co-producing public services with citizens, attention in the literature has started to
shift towards incorporating the service user’s viewpoints in decision-making to legitimise the
organisation within the civil society (e.g., Leardini, 2019). While research on user
representation has progressed, it has been studied in the narrow context of non-profit
governance. This stream of literature has explored the tensions between upwards
accountability towards funders and donors, and downward accountability towards the service
user (e.g., Edwards and Hulme, 1996; Ebrahim, 2003), and concluded that the conflict
40



between the two threatens TSO legitimacy, and that TSOs are forced to prioritize the donors’
wishes out of the desire to legitimise. These studies also tend to assume that legitimacy is
static because threats to legitimacy can be eliminated by correcting technical deficiencies of
TSOs, that is introducing mechanisms for improving user representation, accountability, and
transparency. However, a legitimate organisation is the one that pursues socially acceptable
goals in a socially acceptable manner (i.e., is aligned with normative prescriptions), and
efficiency and performance alone are not sufficient (Suchman, 1995). Therefore, an
assumption that improving technical characteristics alone will produce the desired legitimacy
effects is questionable and requires evidence (Ashforth and Gibbs, 1990).
The mainstream literature on legitimacy has called for a greater construct clarity and the
recognition of the complexity of the concept (e.g., Deephouse and Suchman, 2008;
Deephouse et al., 2017; Suddaby et al., 2017). Similarly, echoing how the concept developed
outside of the field, more critical concerns in the literature on TSO legitimacy have been raised
that TSO legitimacy should be conceptualised as a multi-facet concept (e.g., Carré et al., 2021;
Lister, 2003; Leardini, 2019). The multiple layers of institutional environments of TSOs,
operating in various policy fields and geographical territories, the multiplicity of constituent
demands and the simultaneous need to pursue funding from government, voluntary and
commercial sources have all been found to have important implications for legitimacy.
Recent discussions in legitimacy literature have embraced social constructivist theories to
explain legitimacy. These theories suggest that actors interpret their social world by
reproducing social situations and structures through their interactions (Giddens, 1984;
Goffman, 1963). The identification of social structures, which include rules, norms, and
contexts helps interpret social reality. Institutions influence the behavior of actors, which can
include maintaining existing arrangements or seeking alternatives (Lawrence and Suddaby,
2006). As institutions provide the social context for resource integration (Edvardsson et al.,
2011), identifying these institutional “rules” assists in identifying those interactions that are
important. TSOs’ environments are not homogeneous, and different organisations may
operate within slightly different environments, and interact with different constituents. Lister
(2003) argued that adopting an environmental perspective of legitimacy makes it possible to
consider that an organisation’s legitimacy is based on different aspects with different
stakeholders and that an organisation’s legitimacy with one stakeholder might not be
41



compatible with its legitimacy with another. She concludes that a nuanced understanding of
TSOs can be obtained through “an analysis of the constructs within an organisation’s
environments” (p.184). The socially constructed approach of legitimacy recognises that
legitimacy is fundamentally contested and shaped by a TSO’s ability to conform to dominant
discourses in the wider institutional environment (Walton, 2008). Simultaneously, it
recognises the active role of TSOs in the process of legitimation, through the use of a range
of context and audience-specific strategies (Bryant, 2005; Walton, 2012; Dodworth, 2014).

2.4 Legitimacy through the lens of the Public Service
Ecosystem (PSE)
This section explores and compares the applicability of several theoretical frameworks found
in the extant literature that have been applied in the study of TSO legitimacy. The section will
compare stakeholder theory, network theory and systems theory and consider the
applicability of the ecosystems approach for the study.

2.4.1 From dyads to ecosystems
Despite the growing calls of researchers to adopt an environmental view of legitimacy (Lister,
2003) and consider legitimacy as a multi-level, multi-stakeholder concept which is dynamic in
nature (Carré et al., 2021), the non-profit literature has maintained a narrow focus on
studying legitimacy as a dyadic relationship between the organisation and its audiences.
Schoon et al., (2020), for example, proposed a framework to study legitimacy in actoraudience dyads. A dyad according to their framework consists of “an object of legitimacy (the
thing being evaluated), an audience (the source of evaluation), and a relationship that
connects the two” (Schoon, 2022, p.5).
The literature review highlights that viewing legitimacy as a dyad, or a system of dyads omits
important constructs of legitimacy. It has shown that legitimacy is socially constructed and
contextually dependent (Suchman, 1995). Legitimacy claims can be based on values (e.g.,
Hudson, 2002), organisational processes (e.g., Guo and Musso, 2007), organisational links
(Alexander, 2000), prevailing cognitive schemes (Nevile, 2008), and a whole set of other
contingent factors (e.g., reputation, age, expertise, etc.).

42



Various terms have been used to describe a system of relationships of organisations with their
stakeholders including networks (e.g., Gummesson, 1999); value constellations (Normann
and Ramirez, 1993); value nets (Parolini, 1999); and service ecosystem (Vargo et al., 2017).
Many studies in the non-profit literature on governance and legitimacy applied stakeholder
theory and network theory (e.g., Costa et al., 2011; Dhanani and Connoly, 2012; Knox, 2007;
Schoon et al., 2020; Wang, 2021; Zhou and Ye, 2019). Classic stakeholder theory states that
organisations must address a set of stakeholder expectations; these stakeholders are distinct
and mutually exclusive, with a focal firm linked to a stakeholder network (Freeman, 1984).
This theoretical perspective, however, has been criticised for assuming that the environment
is static (Key, 1999). Rowley (1997) argued that stakeholder theory is narrowly focused on
dyadic relationships between individual stakeholders and a focal organisation and lacks an
understanding of how organisations respond to stakeholder influences. Consequently, the
author advocated for the use of network theories to explain how organisations respond to
their stakeholders through an analysis of the complex array of multiple and interdependent
relationships in stakeholder environments. Generally, researchers have called for a
perspective that would take a broader view on interconnected relationships within a network
and accept that the behaviour of an organisation can have direct and indirect impacts on
other actors in the network (Frow et al., 2014).
Research on organisational networks can be traced to Granovetter (1985) who emphasized
the importance of social ties through which organisations manage their mutual dependencies.
Later Powell (1990) and Nohria and Eccles (1992) proposed the concept of the “network form”
of organisation, in which inter-organisational cooperation is expressed through alliances, joint
ventures or buyer-supplier relationships. Borgatti and Halgin (2011, p. 1168), define network
theory as “the mechanisms and processes that interact with network structures to yield
certain outcomes….” The theory borrows heavily from graph theory which explores
relationships between objects and represents them in graphs (Wasserman and Faust, 1994).
Within network theory, network structure refers to the pattern of relationships within which
the industry is embedded (Gulati et al, 2000). The unit of analysis of inter-organisational
networks research is a firm. Organisations form formal relationships, and their
embeddedness in these relationships influences their opportunities and constraints (Powell
et al, 1996). Specifically, network theory focuses on the implications of such network variables
43



as network density, structural holes, structural equivalence, and core versus peripheral firms,
for the organisational performance (Podolny, 2001), typically profitability (Rowley et al.,
2000), costs (Podolny, 1993) or revenues (Shipilov, 2006). Network researchers also explore
the origins of network positions by looking at how ties are formed (e.g., Gulati and Gargiulo,
1999), in which case, the dyad (that is, the locus of the tie) becomes a unit of analysis. Other
network research concerns exploring and assessing properties of entire networks such as its
overall clustering coefficient or average path length (Kogut and Walker, 2001).
As argued by the supporters of network theory, the network perspective highlights the
importance of social relations for organisational and interorganisational affairs on achieving
organisational outcomes (Borgatti, and Halgin, 2011; Brass, 2002; Salancik, 1995). However,
albeit the perspective overcomes the weaknesses of narrower dyadic models (Gummesson,
2008) and considers a larger number of constituents, it remains narrowly focused on
interorganisational relationships. Thus, it cannot account for the broader environmental
context in which TSOs exist and relate to. With the complexities of modern services, the
attention needs to shift from a sole focus on an organisation's relationship with customers
and other stakeholders, and a narrow and incomplete view of a network, to a broader
perspective (Frow et al., 2014).
A more expansive approach to relationships between entities is offered by systems thinking.
Systems theory has contributed substantially to the foundation and development of many
disciplines such as biology, sociology, psychology, information processing and engineering
(Ng, 2009). Researchers adopting the systems worldview have called the emphasis on the
parts mechanistic, reductionist, or atomistic (Capra and Luisi, 2014). The more holistic
perspective has become known as systemic and the way of thinking it entails as systems
thinking (Vargo et al., 2017).
The move from the mechanistic to the systemic paradigm has taken different shapes and
proceeded at different speeds in various scientific fields (Vargo et al., 2017). Several systems
approaches have been developed, which include general systems theory (Von Bertalanffy,
1967); open systems theory (Boulding, 1956; Katz and Kahn, 1978); and viable systems
approach (Barile et al., 2012; Beer, 1972; Golinelli, 2010). A common feature in the systems
approaches across scientific fields is to think of phenomena as complex systems. Ng et al.
(2009, p.6) define “systems” as an “entity which is a coherent whole”. Checkland (1981)
44



propose that each system has five main characteristics: (a) coherent whole, (b) boundary, (c)
mechanism of control, (d) inputs and outputs and (e) sub-systems and wider whole.
The system is composed of interrelated parts but “the whole is more than the sum of the
parts, at least in the important pragmatic sense that, given the properties of the parts and the
laws of their interaction, it is not a trivial matter to infer the properties of the whole” (Simon,
1962, p. 195). This approach, therefore, studies the organisation in its totality. Hence, the first
and most general feature of systems thinking is the change in perspective from the parts to
the whole, suggesting that the characteristics of the whole cannot be directly inferred from
its smaller elements (Senge, 1990; Simon, 1962). In fact, the shift in the focus from the parts
to the whole means that all phenomena are ultimately interconnected, and their essential
properties derive from their relationships with other elements (Kast and Rosenzweig, 1972).
Organisation as a system is understood by identifying various sub-systems within it, and each
sub-system is characterised by certain processes, roles, structures, and norms of conduct
(Laszlo and Krippner, 1998). Ng et al. (2009) suggest that this view allows drawing boundaries
around an entity and distinguishing between the “inside” and “outside” elements. The
presence of a boundary supports the identification of inputs and outputs that cross the
boundary. Each entity has an internal control mechanism enabling it to keep its identity. All
these elements of the system that function together show some level of organisation.
Therefore, an entity is considered as a “whole”, has sub-systems and is part of a wider whole
(Checkland, 1981). Capra and Luisi (2014) suggest that another defining feature of systems
thinking is that the primary unit of analysis is relationships and interactions. In systems
thinking, a system is more than a static pattern of elements, and structures are seen as
manifestations of underlying processes, which emphasises the self-generating properties of
such a system (Varela et al., 1974). Finally, the emphasis of interactions and processes in
systems thinking suggests that phenomena cannot be measured in the conventional sense
(Capra and Luisi, 2014). Instead, to identify repeating configurations in the system or their
relationships, researchers use mapping (Gleick, 1987). Networks is one examples of such
patterns of organising alongside feedback cycles and boundaries (Barile et al., 2016).
Accordingly, the focus oscillates between the parts and the whole, the internal and the
external contexts, and at the multiple systems levels, that is from individuals to organisations
to networks of organisations up to the whole ecosystem (Redfield, 2009).
45



There is a long tradition of systems thinking in management literature where the term
“system” is widely used, for example, business system, production system, marketing system,
channel system (Barile et al., 2016). A marketing system, for example, can be considered at
different levels, from those related to a specific transaction, to a much more complex array
of relationships at an aggregate marketing system level (e.g., Layton, 2008; Wilkie and Moore,
2006).
Scott (1961) is believed to be the first to describe the relationship between systems theory
and organisation theory:
The distinctive qualities of modern organisation theory are its conceptual-analytical
base, its reliance on empirical research data, and above all, its integrating nature. These
qualities are framed in a philosophy which accepts the premise that the only meaningful
way to study organisation is to study it as a system…Modern organisation theory and
general system theory are similar in that they look at organisation as an integrated
whole. (p. 15)
Despite the advantages, the systems approach does not provide models which may be
suitable for all types of organisations, and a structure that works for one unit may not be
appropriate for another. In other words, the whole idea of contingency is missing from the
approach (Kast and Rosenzweig, 1972). Yet, a lot of research have used the terms “network”
and “system” interchangeably (Frow and Payne, 2019; Gummesson, 2008). The present study,
however, treats them separately by recognising that a stakeholder network forms part of a
higher-order system and suggests that a non-profit funding system may be specified at
different levels including: a single transaction; a set of transactions involving specific fundees
and funders; a specific stakeholder; a network of stakeholders; and a highly complex array of
transactions characterizing a complete economy at the aggregate funding system level.
The application of systemic approaches in research on legitimacy remains limited, and there
are only few examples of cross-level studies in research. For example, Holm (1995) presented
a “nested systems” view of legitimacy, to examine how various sources contributed to the
legitimation and de-legitimation of mandated sales organisation in Norwegian fisheries. Sine
et al. (2007) examined the effects of firm and sector legitimacy on new ventures, and Crumley
et al. (2006) examined how social actors attempted to legitimate and delegitimate the role of
acupuncture within the institutionalized western healthcare system. These studies however
46



remain concerned with the processes of institutionalisation per se and aim to explore
institutional change and how legitimation or delegitimation occurs over time. The aim of this
thesis is not to explore how an organisation emerges as legitimate and the processes that
destabilise or otherwise strengthen its legitimacy over time. The present study attempts to
consider the phenomenon of legitimacy in its complexity and shift the focus away from
narrow dyadic models.
Suddaby et al. (2017) usefully outlined three perspectives on legitimacy – those that view
legitimacy as a product of two primary actors—the organisation and its external environment;
as the product of interaction of multiple actors (typically organisations) operating largely at
more macrolevels of analysis (e.g., the organisational field); or as occurring between the
collective and the individual. The present study aims to address the call by Deephouse and
Suchman (2008) to examine legitimation at multiple levels – within organisations, among
organisations, and within organisational fields – and that these investigations should include
the interactions among the levels. The theoretical lens with which the study of organisational
legitimacy is proposed in the present thesis is that of the ecosystem.

2.4.2 Public Service Ecosystem
The term “ecosystem” has become increasingly pervasive in the literature on strategic
management (Adner, 2017), innovation (Granstrand and Holgersson, 2020), service
marketing and management (Vargo et al., 2017) and inter alia public administration literature
(PAM) (Hodgkinson, 2017; Osborne et al., 2022; Petrescu, 2019; Trischler and Charles, 2019).
The rise of the term is related to an increasing interest among both researchers and
practitioners to extend the studies of a phenomenon beyond single units, recognise their
multiple interdependencies and locate them in geographic and institutional milieu.
Originally borrowed from biology, the term ecosystem was introduced in social science by
Amos Hawley who defined ecosystems as an “arrangement of mutual dependencies in a
population by which the whole operates as a unit and thereby maintains a viable
environmental relationship” (Hawley, 1986, p. 26). In strategic management, the term was
introduced by Moore (1993) whose early work focused on describing the phenomenon,
generally using the term “ecosystem” as a metaphor for the interdependency of
organisations. Moore (1996) suggested that the business ecosystem perspective extends the
47



traditional focus of strategic management on core products and networks (extended
enterprise). It views an organisation not as member of a single industry but as part of a
business ecosystem that crosses a variety of industries.
In the management literature, however, some writers use the terms “network”, “system” and
“ecosystem” interchangeably and there are significant definitional overlaps (e.g., Battistella
et al., 2012; Chesbrough, 2007; Iansiti and Levien, 2004; Yiu and Yau, 2006). Until now,
research in business ecosystems has taken different approaches, the main ones being the
metaphorical approach, which uses natural ecosystems as a metaphor for understanding
business networks. This “business ecosystem” stream continues to focus on a firm and its
environment (Jacobides et al., 2018). Iansiti and Levien (2004, p.8), for example, define
business ecosystems as organised around keystone species and “characterised by a large
number of loosely interconnected participants who depend on each other for their mutual
effectiveness and survival.” Performance of individual actors is inseparable from the
performance of the ecosystem. Moore (1996, p. 26) defined a business ecosystem as “an
economic community supported by a foundation of interacting organisations and
individuals—the organisms of the business world”. This expansive view, however, makes it
difficult to precisely define the scope of the ecosystem.
The innovation ecosystem stream offers a clearer focus (Jacobides et al., 2018). It equally
acknowledges interdependence across actors but links it with a specific “focal value
proposition” for the customer. Despite a clearer focus, the view of an ecosystem in this stream
of literature remains closely associated with that of a network. Adner (2017, p.42), for
example, defines an ecosystem as “the alignment structure of the multilateral set of partners
that need to interact in order for a focal value proposition to materialise”. Similar definitions
of ecosystems as networks of affiliated organisations are found in other studies (e.g., Autio
and Thomas 2014; Jacobides et al., 2015; Rong and Shi, 2014). Moreover, these studies are
concerned with the business and customer value as it pertains to the private sector.
Organisations are open systems, and simultaneously form part of inter-organisational
networks and ecosystems, yet research on networks and ecosystems developed in isolation
(Gulati et al., 2000). Some researchers offer to clearly differentiate between the two. The
starting point in networks research is the presence or absence of inter-organisational
relationships, while the focus of ecosystems research often concerns either the ecosystem as
48



a whole, or the focal offering that is provided by the ecosystem (e.g., electric car, smartphone,
software application), and not the focal firm or the alliance (Shipilov and Gaver, 2019).
Henderson and Palmatier (2010, p.44) argue that the term “ecosystem” is broader than
“network” and “helps provide clarity by emphasizing the diversity of the components that
comprise it, some of which are networks themselves”. Leith (2013) argues that an ecosystem
differs from a stakeholder system in that it includes actors who are not classed as
stakeholders such as “anti-clients”, activist groups and competitors. It includes more than the
organisational network and incorporates powerful species such as governmental bodies,
associations and standardisation bodies (Anggraeni et al., 2007). While ecosystem members
may or may not have alliances (networks) amongst themselves, they must be aligned with
each other (be it expressed as a set of alliances or not) for the value proposition to realise.
Jacobides et al. (2018, p. 2264) compare networks and ecosystems and state that ecosystems
consist of “a set of actors with varying degrees of multi-lateral, non-generic
complementarities that are not fully hierarchically controlled”. Networks, in turn, have
strategic significance for their members, and are more formal and enduring interorganisational relationships (Gulati et al., 2000). Multilateral means “a set of relationships
that are not decomposable to an aggregation of bilateral interactions” (Adner, 2017, p.42). In
other words, the relationships between two entities are themselves dependent on all other
relationships within the ecosystem. The phenomenon therefore differs from the set of dyadic
relationships seen in alliances. For example, when the funder and the fundee collaborate on
a joint project, they may focus on achieving outcomes, however, the realisation of this project
may also require the staff to meet certain requirements such as relevant qualifications, their
staff must pass prior screening if the work involves vulnerable users, and the work processes
must adhere to government approved health and safety regulations and so forth. While the
governments and regulatory entities, professional associations and educational institutions
are not members of the alliance, they are still important nonprofit ecosystem members within
that broader ecosystem (Shipilov and Gaver, 2019).
This way it can be concluded that in the management literature ecosystems are used as a
metaphor for a complex environment describing a wider set of organisational relationships
beyond direct stakeholders who cooperate with the aim of producing products and services
that customers will value. When Moore (1993; 1996) introduced the concept of business

49



ecosystems, it provided a way for the organisational research to expand the scope of their
analysis beyond business networks and consider the organisation at the system level in which
many organisations and industries form an interconnected structure of organisations,
technologies, consumers and products (Gundlach, 2006). The natural ecosystem as a
metaphor helps business research to go beyond the atomistic and internal view of the firm,
since a natural ecosystem is a complex, self-organising system. Korhonen (2005) argues that
while the use of a metaphor cannot be wrong, its usefulness must be determined in relation
to its contribution to the real world. This means that future studies should go beyond the
metaphor and establish the underlying mechanisms and relations in an empirical way.
The high profile of TSOs in policy development and political debate (Macmillan, 2013) and a
focus on extended role of non-government providers in service delivery (Alcock, 2016),
greater austerity in public spending, and growing demand for social services have led many
researchers to conclude that the role of the third sector in the delivery of public services will
continue to grow (Clifford, 2017). The nature of social services that TSOs deliver is different
from the services of the private markets. Public services are typically more complex, include
a broader range of stakeholders, and demand higher levels of transparency and accountability
(Farr, 2016) than private sector counterparts. “Repeat business” (Best et al., 2019) may not
be an indicator of success in the public sector context; customers may be coerced to
participate in services, multiple stakeholder groups may have different perceptions of what
an outcome of the service should be, and relationships between stakeholders in the process
of co-creation of value across a network are more complex (Osborne, 2018). Consequently,
the PAM literature has grown considerably to embrace these ideas and the concept of
ecosystem has received much development as an analytic tool rather than simply as a
metaphor particularly within the work of Osborne et al. (2022) on Public Service Logic.
The contemporary PAM literature has emphasized that contemporary public services are
embedded within a network comprised of multiple actors whose direct and indirect
interactions do not exist in isolation but form part of a wider ecosystem (Hodgkinson et al.
2017; Jaakkola et al., 2015). The pressures on public sector organisations to meet the multiple
and sometimes conflicting stakeholder interests across complex public service networks have
intensified, and partnerships and consortia have become the “modality of choice” (Austin and
Seitanidi, 2012, p. 728). Yet, with government as a stakeholder, public sector organisations
50



experience alignment problems in outcome-based contracts (Farr, 2016). Public sector
organisations must actively interact with various stakeholders as the outcomes of public
services are formed through the interaction of many actors rather than of one single actor
(Klijn and Koppenjan, 2012). Thus, the process of addressing societal and individual needs
should embrace multiple actors through dynamic roles in an inter-organisational context
(Bryson et al., 2017).
The PSE approach explores both context and system (Leite and Hodgkinson, 2021). The
framework moves the focus away from dyadic relationships between public service
organisations and their users, to a much broader perspective that includes multiple elements,
processes and relationships within a service ecosystem (Strokosch and Osborne, 2020). The
PSE has been used as a framework to understand the complexities of contemporary public
services (Petrescu, 2019) and has been applied in the studies of a wide range of topics
including learning and leadership (Kinder et al., 2022), public service design (Trischler and
Charles, 2019) and stakeholder salience within PSEs (Best et al., 2019). These authors apply
the ecosystem approach in a more structured way and use it as an operational concept rather
than a metaphor for a complex environment.
The ecosystem perspective explicitly recognises the role of service users in the delivery of
public services. A good example of the importance of the user views is provided by Trischler
and Trischler (2022) who studied digitization from the ecosystem perspective:
How would then a patient perceive a change towards digitalized healthcare whereby
consulting with his/her doctor occurs online, via a chat window or a video link? While
such a solution may be cost-effective and convenient from the healthcare provider’s
perspective, it still requires careful consideration of the patient’s practices linked to
“seeing the doctor”. Otherwise … the digital service may not be perceived as legitimate
and may not be adopted by patients (even when these have full access to the service).
From this standpoint, it is hardly surprising that even neatly-designed public services fail
– they do “not account for actors’ shared rules, norms, and beliefs that need to be
transformed.” (p. 1257)
This example points to the importance of legitimacy and the need to seek “approval” from
the user. The service must not be simply offered, it must consider the needs of expectations
of the user to legitimise, and therefore, approved, accepted, and be seen as appropriate.
51



Trischler and Trischler (2022) move on to suggest that the service ecosystem concept not only
helps to move public service design towards a systemic approach, but also to consider the
role of institutions more closely. They propose that public services must be attentive to the
institutional arrangement underpinning service delivery activities as many public services
(e.g., policing, public libraries, and healthcare facilities) are deeply rooted in rules, norms, and
assumptions. While the ecosystems approach might be criticized for maintaining such a broad
perspective it allows capturing complexity without unnecessary sophistry. It structures a
space for multiple elements so that their contribution to the phenomena can be understood.
To understand the nature of TSO legitimacy within their complex environments, the
ecosystem perspective is considered in the present study. The ecosystem perspective helps
to reveal how legitimacy is contingent on broader interactive service ecosystems beyond the
organisation (Petrescu, 2019), which include both the service-specific elements of the system
(TSOs, technology, service delivery processes, etc.) and the broader societal context and
values that surround and legitimate this service system (Laitinen et al., 2018). The perspective
helps shift focus away from treating phenomenon in isolation at a single level or a single actor
(e.g., funder or the state), typical of extant studies on third sector legitimacy. The present
study will therefore seek to apply the key theoretical underpinnings of the ecosystem
framework to the non-profit setting. The ecosystem approach will help move away from the
dyadic models between the TSO and their audience and explore the multiple interactions
between the factors that were found to be important for TSO legitimacy. To the best of the
author’s knowledge, this represents a novel approach to conceptualising TSO legitimacy.
Within a service ecosystem, the interactions occur at different levels “built into constitutions,
legislation, regulations and funding arrangements” (Bryson et al., 2017). There are several
ecosystem frameworks in the PAM literature. Hodgkinson et al. (2017), for example, pay less
attention to the structure of the PSE itself and tend to use the concepts of “ecosystem” and
“network” interchangeably. As has been shown in earlier parts of the literature review,
networks are indeed essential, but not sufficient for legitimacy, and other factors must be
recognised. Petrescu (2019) explored the structure and interactions of the macro, meso, and
micro levels of the PSE, but institutional, organisational, and individual values, processes, and
norms, which are all important dimensions of legitimacy, were omitted. Trischler and Charles
(2019) focus on public policy, rather than PAM. Osborne et al. (2022) used PSE as a unifying
52





Within the PSE, context frames interactions at four levels and occurs at multiple levels: the
macro level identifies the institutional arrangements to legitimate value creation in society,
the meso level explores the processes of value creation at the organisational level, and the
micro level reveals the actuality of value creation for individual service users, staff, and
citizens. To this framework Osborne et al. (2022) have recently added the sub-micro level or
the beliefs and values of individuals. The role of values for TSO legitimacy have been
recognised, and the thesis proposes that these more granular perspectives of organisational
legitimacy can bring greater clarity to the element groupings and their interactions.
The present thesis does not aim to provide definitive answers. It is the first attempt to address
the call of researchers to embrace the environmental complexity in which TSOs operate
(Lister, 2003) and show how the focus on dyadic models of organisational legitimacy in the
non-profit literature can be resolved by using an ecosystem approach. This framework may
then provide initial guidance for further exploration and testing. The characteristics of the
ecosystems approach have suggested compelling reasons for adopting this perspective to
understand TSO legitimacy. It may overcome the limitations of traditional dyadic or
stakeholder models by considering relationships as systemic, mutually adapting interactions.
The ecosystem lens represents a novel and persuasive approach through which to understand
TSO legitimacy. It may advance an understanding of TSO legitimacy, but this approach needs
to be adapted to the environment of TSOs. Therefore, the present thesis seeks to adapt and
develop the approach further.
PAM research studies have laid the foundation for the next stage of research, going beyond
dyadic interactions to address dynamic ecosystems across various interaction patterns. This
study is the first to do so in the field of research on non-profit legitimacy. Because any
business or social organisation can be regarded as a service ecosystem, traditional
reductionist views that focus on distinct parts in the analysis of a phenomenon are not
sufficient in the complex, dynamic environments that characterise modern, deeply
interconnected social organisations. An analytical-reductionist approach still dominates nonprofit legitimacy studies failing to go beyond the structural boundaries of enterprises or
perceive the multiple interaction tiers that emerge. The ecosystems approach instead can
help apply holism in a unitary framework and thereby avoid an unbalanced approach to the
study of structural features and avoid a risk to overemphasise the dyads at the expense of
54



other important relationships that may provide the context to interactions. A shift from a
dyadic approach to an ecosystem approach will allow considering the interactive dynamics
among internal and external components (Barile and Saviano, 2014) by the inclusion of a
larger number of influencing factors that go beyond the direct funder-fundee relationship. In
addition, this study is the first to incorporate the local milieu in the analysis of TSO legitimacy.
This can help appreciate that legitimacy does not originate in dyads but requires interactions
of the elements of the ecosystem.

2.5 Conclusions
Organisations exist to the extent that society considers they are legitimate (Deegan, 2002).
Legitimacy is granted by internal and external constituents who may endorse and support an
organisation’s goals and activities (Pfeffer and Salancik, 1978). Thus, it is essential for TSOs to
meet the expectations, often taken-for-granted, of the environment in which they operate
(DiMaggio and Powell, 1991) but at the same time shape their legitimacy by applying a variety
of approaches.
The present study seeks to address the following research question: “What constitutes the
legitimating environment of TSOs with different funding structures? What are the
contingencies of a TSO’s legitimacy within this environment?”
The studies on non-profit financing have sometimes taken deterministic views that legitimacy
of TSOs is determined by their association with legitimate others who hold power, authority,
and resources. As further analysis of the mainstream literature on legitimacy has shown, the
sources of organisational legitimacy are not restricted to any particular group and depend on
the organisational context (Deephouse et al., 2017), and thus TSOs must cater for the
demands of multiple constituents, including the user and local community. Organisational
theorists have recognised that institutional environments are complex and consist of multiple
institutional "pillars" (Scott, 1995), multiple resource providers (Pfeffer and Salancik, 1978),
and multiple stakeholders (Evan and Freeman, 1988). It is important to consider how these
contribute to the study of the legitimating environment of TSOs. These are summarised in
three major points.
First, institutional environments are fragmented and composed of different domains
reflecting different types of institutions: regulatory, cognitive, normative, and pragmatic
55



(Scott, 1995; Suchman, 1995). These domains cover a broad range of elements from individual
beliefs to formal laws and cognitive, taken-for-granted schemes. Understanding which criteria
are used and by which audiences helps develop a better understanding of TSO legitimacy
(Lister, 2003). Second, the third sector itself is fragmented. TSOs operate across multiple
policy fields and are geographically spread (Clifford, 2017; NCVO, 2022; SCVO, 2022). Not only
there are differences between Scotland and England, but Scottish TSOs operate in different
localities. These geographical differences suggest that TSOs may vary with respect to their
institutional environments and are exposed to different sources of authority (Kostova and
Zaheer, 1999). Hence, the local milieu should be included in the overall consideration of TSO
legitimacy. Third, TSOs are characterised by a multiplicity of audiences who confer legitimacy.
Prior studies on TSO legitimacy tend to single out one or two powerful constituent groups,
usually the state and funders because they are believed to hold more legitimising power.
However, complying with one or the other may not be sufficient (Dowling and Pfeffer, 1975)
as TSOs have a diverse group of internal and external constituents including but not limited
to employees, volunteers, service users, umbrella organisations, governments, and donors.
According to Anheier (2000), they will have different interests and thus will refer to legitimacy
dimensions which they deem more important. Theoretically they should legitimise with
multiple constituents and generally it is not clear who should be more important in moral or
legal terms (Costa et al., 2011). Moreover, a TSO which prioritizes donors risks incurring ‘‘the
displacement of the ends by the means’’ (Frumkin and Clark, 2000, p. 160).
Yet, contemporary literature on legitimacy also stresses the importance of agency and
strategic behavior by both the organisation being evaluated and the constituents who
evaluate (Suddaby et al., 2017). Because of these complexities, many researchers advocate
for a context-sensitive study of legitimacy (Bielefeld, 2002; Connoly and Hyndman, 2017; Guo
and Musso, 2007; Lister, 2003). Viewing organisational legitimacy as a multi-layered construct
allows us to develop a more fine-grained understanding of TSO legitimacy (Carré et al., 2021).
In the non-profit context, legitimacy may be related to several key elements working together
(Brown et al., 2001; Lister, 2003). To answer the research question satisfactorily, it is thus
necessary to move the focus away from the relationships with powerful stakeholders and
adopt a multi-dimensional understanding of TSO legitimacy and a multi-stakeholder
perspective.
56



Chapter summary
This chapter provided an overview of the literature relevant to the aims of the thesis. It had
defined and presented the core concepts of the study, covered the main debates in the
literature on TSO legitimacy and more recent developments of the concept in the wider
literature, and finally considered the application of the ecosystem approach in the study of
legitimacy.
The first section sought to define the concept of the third sector and set the boundaries for
the study. It uncovered the lack of a uniform definition of the third sector, and considerable
flexibility with which the term is being used both in theory and practice. Moreover, the section
outlined the concept of SE for commercial income as this has become an important source of
funding for TSOs. The present study is not focused on SEs per se, but in SE activities of TSOs.
The review then continued to present the context for the study. It has outlined the policy
background which has had a significant impact on the development of the third sector in the
UK, affecting the relationships between the third sector and state, resulting in the changes in
the funding patterns. It concludes that focus on co-production, austerity in public spending,
growing demand on social services is placing increased demands on TSOs. Yet, Scotland has
long sought to be different in social policy terms, and the third sector in Scotland has roots in
the cooperative movement. The unique traditions of the country are shaping a distinct
Scottish third sector with more dependence on government sources of funding and
opposition to any form of profiteering in the third sector. The section then presented the
latest statistics for the sector and confirmed the higher dependence of the Scottish third
sector on public funding (with higher proportion of local government funding in the funding
mix). The present thesis argues that these contextual differences or the characteristics of the
place may have important implications for TSO legitimacy and thus must be considered.
The literature review then continued to explore the concept of legitimacy. It established the
commonly accepted definition but also identified that the definition evolved to a more
evaluative definition that captures the antecedences, the actors who make judgements and
the outcomes of their judgment (e.g., approval/acceptance). It established the different
typologies of legitimacy and identified that institutions encompass norms, rules, beliefs, and
cognitive schemes. These institutions can be classified into four main domains of legitimacy –

57



pragmatic, regulatory, normative, and cognitive. These are the reference points for the actors
or the audiences who make legitimacy judgements. It established that audiences may vary
according to the nature and type of the organisation. The literature has been mainly focused
on state, society-at-large, media and large collective actors because they are believed to have
authority and/or power to grant legitimacy. The study then explored legitimacy of TSOs and
identified that first and foremost TSOs’ claims for legitimacy are rooted in their values and as
set in their missions, but they also believe that their legitimacy lies in their expertise, close
ties with community, and their standing for the basic rights, values, and principles.
Yet, the literature on TSO legitimacy has maintained that dependence on external financing
is damaging TSO normative legitimacy, leading TSOs astray from their missions (Milbourne
and Cushman, 2015). The literature presented here has provided a brief overview of various
changes observed in TSOs due to their adaptation to evolving political, organisational and
institutional contexts. These changes are often a result of isomorphic forces placed on TSOs.
It was then established that the institutional environments are complex and TSOs themselves
have multiple constituents suggesting that it may be counterintuitive to consider legitimacy
as exclusively a product of a dyadic relationship with the legitimate other. TSOs must be able
to satisfy the needs of other constituents (Lister, 2003; Nevile, 2008). Yet, TSOs can manage
their legitimacy using a variety of approaches such as building partnerships, communicating
with their audiences, diversifying income base, and engaging the user in decision-making.
In the final section, the theoretical framework has been outlined. The analysis of the literature
suggested that the present models of legitimacy as occurring in dyads is not adequate. The
literature uncovered the call of the researchers to consider legitimacy as occurring at multiple
levels, and in the interactive process. Yet, there currently exist no such frameworks in the
literature on legitimacy that can provide the researcher with the conceptual apparatus to
explore the complexity of organisational legitimacy characterised by multiple institutional
domains, multiple constituents, exposure to different institutional environments (e.g., local
milieu and wider) and duality of goals. The conceptualisation of public service delivery has
recently received much development in the PAM literature. Importantly, the ecosystems
framework allows both the structure and context to be included in the consideration, and the
present study argued that the recent developments in the PAM literature can help shed light
on TSO legitimacy.
58



CHAPTER 3: METHODOLOGY

Chapter overview
The proposed study on legitimacy of TSOs has exploratory aims. First, it aims to describe the
legitimation processes of Scottish TSOs. Second, it sets out to explore the contextual factors
influencing legitimation.
The purpose of this chapter is to present the methodological underpinnings of this research.
A large part of the present study was undertaken during the Covid-19 pandemic, and many
methodological choices discussed later in the chapter were in part dictated by the realities of
Covid-19. Therefore, it was decided to open the chapter by providing the contextual
background to the study and describe the conditions in which it took place, and how the wider
context shaped the research processes underpinning the study.
The next section of this chapter covers the key elements of the research design. It commences
with outlining the philosophical position, research strategy and methodological design
adopted in this study. It then continues to present the key features of the empirical study,
and the details of the sample and sampling procedures will be provided followed by the
outline of the research methods and techniques used in the collection and analysis of data.
The chapter concludes with a reflection on validity of the study and the steps taken in this
study to ensure its academic rigour and integrity.

3.1 Placing the study in context: the impact of Covid-19
The original study had different aims. It concerned social investment and how repayable
forms of financing are related to organisational legitimacy. Even though there have been
many articles in the media about social investment, few defined it or used it interchangeably
with other terms such as impact investing. Like the concept of SE in its early days confusion
around social investment arose, and there was a sense of it as being another buzzword. Few
academic sources about the phenomenon existed in the literature and in the first academic
year the author attended seminars, talks and workshops with third sector practitioners and
third sector agencies to understand how it is implemented in practice. In the first academic
year (2018/19) the author had manually constructed a database of 280 organisations in
receipt of social investment. The author had conducted pilot interviews and spoken with a

59



mix of practitioners, academics, and consultants to get a gauge of the phenomenon. Some of
these interviews were formally recorded and formed part of the empirical base (further
details of data collected prior to March 2020 are included in Appendix 2). Having clarified
what it means, towards the close of 2019 the author had negotiated access to four TSOs that
agreed to participate in the study on social investment. The TSOs had diversified income
structures and presented a mix of smaller and larger charities and were interesting cases for
comparative purposes.
However, with the start of the first lockdown, the charities were put under increased
pressure. Like all other sectors of the economy, they had to adapt to the new ways of working
while coping with increased demand for their services and operating under mounting
uncertainty. They put their participation on hold, and by the late summer 2020 three of them
had subsequently withdrawn from the study. In fact, one of them wound down.
This necessitated a reorientation of the study and the selection of other organisations. The
advantage of the previous two years of research on the topic is that the author had developed
a good understanding of the major income streams and studying the relationship between
funding portfolios and legitimacy seemed an interesting path to follow. A decision was made
to expand beyond social investment and focus on the relationship between funding patterns
and organisational legitimacy. This decision was partially driven by a small sampling pool from
which TSOs with social investment could have been selected, but more importantly focusing
on funding as a whole could expand generalisability of the findings to a certain degree
because the study would not be limited to a narrow set of TSOs with a capacity to borrow.
Importantly, it still maintained the research focus on the study of legitimacy. The author’s
research journey will be outlined next and practical limitations posed by Covid will be
discussed throughout the chapter.

3.2 Research philosophy
The term research philosophy denotes “a system of beliefs and assumptions about the
development of knowledge” (Saunders et al., 2019, p.130). The assumptions about the
realities (ontological assumptions), human knowledge (epistemological assumptions), and
the ways the researcher’s own values influence the research process are reflected in the
design of a research study and the collection and analysis of data (Crotty, 1998). A research

60



philosophy is thus what the researcher considers to be truth, reality, and knowledge. Blaikie
(2010) suggest that researchers should explicate their philosophical commitments to provide
more transparency to the processes underpinning their research and the decisions made
while conducting the study.
Positivism is a philosophical position that holds that reality exists objectively and externally,
and the appropriate way to collect data is through a direct observation of the phenomena
(Hammersley, 2013). Positivism posits that there are facts that can be proven, reality is the
same for each person, and observation and measurement tell us what that reality is (Bryman,
2016). In social science, positivism involves the attempt to conduct research which follows
the same general rules and procedures which are adopted in the natural sciences (Clark et al.,
2021).
In contrast, interpretivism argues that methods to understand knowledge related to social
sciences cannot be the same with those in physical sciences because individuals interpret
their world and then acts based on their interpretation of it (Bryman, 2016). They critique the
application of positivism in social research for it neglects individuals’ understanding and
interpretation of events, phenomena or issues that can reveal a lot of truth about reality
(Hammersley, 2013). This approach posits that reality is constituted by human action and
knowledge is culturally and historically embedded, and thus subjectively created based on
people’s experiences and their understanding of them (Ryan, 2018). With interpretivism
perspective, researchers can gain a deeper understanding of the phenomenon and its
complexity in its unique context (Creswell, 2007). However, while interpretivism overcomes
some of the limitations of positivism, the approach lacks the recognition of social structures
and underestimates the impact of social structures on social actors’ understanding of their
everyday life (Blaikie, 2010).
Blaikie (2010, p.34) suggests that the choice of the research paradigm should be driven by the
research question and be the one that the researcher thinks will provide “the greatest
likelihood to answer the research question satisfactorily.” This thesis builds on the critical
realist philosophy, driven by the following considerations. First, the literature revealed that
legitimacy is a complex, multidimensional concept. Legitimacy is a socially constructed
phenomenon arising through multiple interactions and interpretations (Deephouse and
Suchman, 2008; Costa, 2011; Lister, 2003), and this research concerns the perceptions of the
61



staff, board members, CEOs, funders, and service users. Thus, the social actors’
interpretations must be acknowledged and viewed in context. Second, the literature review
has also shown how the environment is acting as a constraining factor that influences
organisations through coercive or mimetic mechanisms by imposing rules, criteria or
structures and exerting pressures to comply. Thus, structures must be part of the wider
picture in the study of legitimacy. Third, the mechanisms of legitimation or how legitimacy is
enacted are not directly observable or measurable. The key argument of this research is that
legitimacy must be studied within the ecosystem of multiple actors, elements, and processes
in a multi-level structure. This is consistent with the critical realist philosophy.

3.2.1 Critical realism
Bhaskar (2016), the founder of realist social science, suggested that much research has
tended to view many entities as dualisms without acknowledging their duality. Thus,
researchers should consider both entities as interdependent. Examples include dualities such
as individualism and collectivism, facts and values, cause and effect and structures and
agents.
Critical realism is both an ontology, describing the nature of the world and an epistemology,
outlining what we can learn about the world and how (Bhaskar, 1978). Ontologically reality
exists at three levels (Figure 3.1). The empirical domain consists of events which can be
observed, the actual domain consists of events whether or not they are observed, and the
real domain consists of the structures and mechanisms which produce these events
(Danermark et al., 2003). This way critical realism makes a distinction between the events
that we can observe and the mechanisms that produce such events. The knowledge that we
hold is therefore provisional and there is always room for better explanations (Eriksson,
2015).

62



Figure 3.1 The three domains, central to ontology and epistemology, in critical realism.
Adapted from Eriksson and Engström (2021)

To give an example from a case study, the data included in a case study is the empirical
domain. The data that is excluded from it such as an environment of another organisation,
the whole industry or country, is part of the actual domain. The real domain are the
mechanisms that we try to uncover by applying an appropriate theory. In accordance with
these strata, the epistemology of critical realism seeks to learn more about the real domain
but acknowledges that this domain can only be understood through the study of events in the
empirical domain (Danermark et al., 2003). In other words, the author of the present study
acknowledges that there is no way to directly observe legitimacy as it does not have a material
form, but it can be inferred from the flow of resources, approvals and endorsements arising
through the interactions of different elements in the ecosystem of the organisation. The
mechanisms of how legitimacy is enacted can only be explained by an appropriate theory.
Because we learn by observing events in the empirical domain, it is important to understand
how these events are created. Critical realists suggest that phenomena must be situated in
the larger wholes (Blaikie, 1993) also known as a social structure. Social structures form a
context, functioning as conditions for agents that transform or reproduce structures (Eriksson
and Engström, 2021). Structures shape agents’ behavior and are, at the same time, shaped by
the agents (Dobson et al., 2007). Because of these inter-connectedness structures and agents
must be studied together and in relation to each other (Archer, 1998; Danermark et al., 2003).
In the context of legitimation processes it helps understand how the human agency should
be viewed according to critical realism. When viewed in relation to the present study, agents
63



such as leaders and board members of a third sector organisation can be considered to act
with intention. They can change the context in which actions are undertaken (e.g., expanding
into new areas of service provision or new geography). However, agents are also restrained
by context, for example, the organisation’s values, plans, rules, power relations or culture.
These factors affect an agent’s actions. Thus, agents can change or reinforce the social
structures in which they act (Archer, 1998; Danermark et al., 2003; Bhaskar, 2016).
One way to understand the interplay between structures and agents is through following
Sayer’s (1992) model who explained the process in terms of agents, powers, conditions, and
events. According to the model, agents have the power to take actions while social constructs
restrain these actions, but actions are also able to alter social constructs. Thus, central to
critical realism is the concept of power. When objects enter relations, they are entitled to a
set of causal powers or generative mechanisms, which reside in them and constitute their
ways of acting (Tsoukas, 1989). When released, the powers may not achieve their intended
outcomes (Fleetwood, 2004). This is because events take place in an open system and are
subject to various, sometimes conflicting causal mechanisms, which implies that they do not
necessarily follow a determined and repeated pattern (Bhaskar, 1978; Harré, 1989; Harré and
Madden, 1975; Moses and Knutsen, 2007). Thus, critical realism concerns the tendencies of
mechanisms to generate observable events where an object’s power (or mechanism) may be
negated or affected by the context (Alvesson and Sköldberg, 2009). As such, critical realism
argues that the events we study are not one-to-one reflections of the real domain because
the context determines what is manifested in the empirical domain (Sayer, 1992).
Accordingly, an understanding of the context in which events are studied is critical because
the context can significantly alter an object’s causal powers (Eriksson and Engström, 2021).
During the analysis, interpreting the findings in relation to the context is important in
understanding the results (Pettigrew et al., 1988).
A central claim of critical realism is that generative mechanisms cannot be understood solely
through the events that manifest in the empirical domain and other contextual factors that
can alter events must be considered. Critical realism embraces eclecticism and seeks for the
best possible explanation of the events we observe, and it prompts researchers to suggest
new theories when existing theoretical framework cannot provide sufficient explanation to
an empirical phenomenon (Ackroyd, 2005).
64



Accordingly, the three domains in critical realism are approached in the following way. The
case (i.e., TSO) is an operational delimitation about which empirical data to include in the
research (Ragin, 1992). Empirical observations can, in turn, elucidate new phenomena that a
framework does not encompass. Such new insights call for the redirection of an existing
theoretical framework. The interplay between theory and framework can be viewed as a
search for the best explanation of mechanisms in the real domain. The interplay between the
empirical world and a case can be viewed as an interplay between the actual and empirical
domains (Eriksson, 2015).

3.2.2 Abductive reasoning
Having outlined the basic principles of critical realism, the attention now turns towards
practical methods of using critical realism. Critical realism predominantly uses abductive
reasoning, defined as a methodology towards generating new knowledge between the
empirical and the theoretical realms (Eriksson, 2015).
The term abduction was first coined by Charles S. Peirce (1839–1914) to capture a mode of
reasoning distinct from deduction and induction that affords the formation and acceptance
of an explanatory hypothesis (Bellucci, 2018). Some authors, however, propose to
differentiate between abduction and retroduction in critical realism (Danermark et al., 2002;
Hartwig, 2007). Chiasson (2001), for example, describe abduction as the reasoning method
by which hypotheses are constructed and retroduction as the overarching method by which
theories are produced in the interplay of abduction, deduction, and induction.
Although these authors suggest that critical realism follows the retroductive logic (e.g., Blaikie
and Priest, 2017), in practice many researchers use the terms interchangeably (Ritz, 2020;
Saxena, 2019). Peirce himself uses the terms “abduction” and “retroduction” synonymously
(Psillos, 2009). Similarly, the founder of the critical realist movement, Bhaskar (2009, p. 61)
writes that his term “analogical-retroductive comes from retroduction or abduction after
Aristotle, Peirce and Hanson.” Therefore, in the rest of the study the term abduction is used.
Abduction straddles between inductive and deductive methods (Coffey and Atkinson, 1996).
Deduction starts with theory and is usually linked with positivist methodologies, which aim to
test phenomena objectively (Hurley et al., 2021). In contrast, induction does not start with a
priori assumptions but aims to build theoretical understanding through interpretive methods
65



(Gioia et al., 2013). Abduction is neither data-driven nor hypothesis-driven and is an approach
that engages equally with empirical data and extant theoretical understanding (Atkinson et
al., 2003; Timmermans and Tavory, 2012). This is not to suggest that a researcher enters the
field with no a priori ideas. The extant theoretical developments do set the initial parameters
of research, relevant to the research question (Alvesson and Kärreman, 2007; Coffey and
Atkinson, 1996). However, the abductive researcher does not commence his or her research
with the aim to test existing theoretical frameworks against empirical data (Kelle, 1997).
Abduction starts when the theory is insufficient to explain a specific observation (Kovács and
Spens, 2005). Abduction does not follow a linear model of knowledge development because
researchers seek to integrate theory with observations (Eriksson and Engström, 2012). This
involves the discovery of the most logical and useful explanation of phenomena (Coffey and
Atkinson, 1996; Hurley et al., 2021; Peirce, 1974; Reichertz, 2013). It seeks to find a match
between empirical data and theory in a creative and iterative process (Taylor et al., 2002).
Kovács and Spens (2005) called this process theory matching or what Dubois and Gadde
(2002, p. 555) called systematic combining or “the matching of, as well as the direction and
redirection between, theory and framework.”
Systematic combining is thus a process that oscillates between an emerging framework and
an evolving empirical case and involves constant reflection on what the best explanation of
the phenomenon should be. To understand how research is directed and redirected, Hulthén
(2002, p. 58) proposed “crossroads” or the moments when the researcher must choose a new
direction. He argues that thinking in terms of crossroads is easier than in terms of direction
and redirection. In what follows next, the author maps out the research processes using the
logic of abductive reasoning.

3.2.3 Applying critical realism to research
Having outlined the key principles of abductive reasoning and its key operational constructs,
in Figure 3.2 the author shows how abductive reasoning was operationalised in her research.
The figure is accompanied by a narrative with the author’s personal reflections about the
abductive processes that underpinned the present study. Albeit it shows a linear process, the
boundaries and transitions were not so clear-cut and smooth. However, a graphical

66



representation can still convey the path from an initial concept and the continuous search for
the most plausible explanation of legitimacy in the context of a TSO.
The starting point of the abductive process in Figure 3.2 was the need to explore financing
patterns of TSOs, and the first exploratory interviews conducted in the spring 2019 suggested
that funding could be dependent on the characteristics of the organisation. When these initial
observations were shared at an academic conference, the benefits theory was brought to the
attention of the author. This discovery can be regarded as a matching process (Dubois and
Gadde, 2002). The benefits theory links funding with the nature of benefits that TSOs deliver

Empirical

Theoretical

(e.g., private, public, etc.).
Applied
benefits
theory to
understand
funding
patterns
Conducted
exploratory
interviews

Identified
relevance of
isomorphism
and legitimacy

Searched for
predicted
relationships

Proposed
that
legitimacy
occurs in
interactions

Observed
resistance to
isomorphic
forces and
different
approaches to
legitimacy

Considered
stakeholder
theory,
network
theory

Proposed
to view
legitimacy
in its
totality

Reviewed
legitimacy
literature,
consulted
wider
literature

Obtained
data on key
stakeholders
and
relationships

Discovered
public
management
literature on
ecosystems

Time

Figure 3.2 An overview of abductive reasoning processes underpinning the study

Over the summer, the researcher attended the practical seminars with TSO practitioners and
in these empirical settings observed that theories with one explanatory factor do not hold in
the complex funding environments that the practitioners talked about at these seminars. In
other words, the author noted a mismatch between the theory and the empirical world
(Taylor et al., 2002). For example, few TSOs that delivered goods of private nature were
funded by public sources of funding contrary to what benefits theory would have predicted.
This revealed a gap in theoretical knowledge, where the extant theoretical framework was
unable to account for empirical findings (Alvesson and Kärreman, 2007; Rinehart, 2021).
Instead, the practitioners mentioned the difficulties presented by the funders, who often
impose their requirements on the organisations. This observation pointed to the presence of
67



isomorphic pressures. The literature on non-profit funding contains many examples of
isomorphic forces and suggests that TSOs comply out of the need to legitimise. By the end of
2019 over 40 interviews with the fundraisers and funding teams were conducted to explore
the instances of isomorphism. The fundraisers, however, tended to provide narrow accounts
of what (mostly their) issues with funding were and the author decided to take a holistic view
of funding and secure access to four organisations to expand the sources of empirical data.
As data from the case-studies was being collected, a puzzle emerged that a funding success
does not guarantee legitimacy and the subsequent service user involvement. An example
from the operational history of one of the case study organisations showed that it was on the
verge of closing because it lacked the service user support. In other words, the abductive
research allowed the author to observe a breakdown when the empirical data differed from
what was expected based on current theoretical understanding (Reichertz, 2013; SchwartzShea and Yanow, 2013). Yet, and contrary to what much of the literature on isomorphism
suggested, the case study organisations actively resisted the external influence and searched
for opportunities to change their circumstances and even voluntarily withdraw from funding
support. This puzzle is part of systematic combining (Dubois and Gadde, 2002) as these new
insights at that point in time necessitated re-direction of the research (Kovács and Spens,
2005). The observations in the empirical domain signalled that the theoretical
conceptualisation of legitimacy as a monolithic concept cannot explain the dynamics of
legitimation processes in real domain. Importantly, viewing legitimacy as occurring in dyadic
relationships between the organisation and the funder could oversimplify the reality.
The literature was then subsequently revisited to try and establish an alternative theoretical
lens to explain the phenomenon of legitimacy in its totality. The latest review of legitimacy
research by Suddaby et al. (2017) contained a call for researchers to adopt wider perspectives
on legitimacy, and the work by prominent legitimacy scholars who promoted an opensystems perspective on legitimacy recognised that stakeholders are potentially agentic, and
legitimacy is often negotiated (Ashforth and Gibbs, 1990; Bitektine, 2011; Deephouse et al.,
2017; Suchman, 1995). This emphasized the role of interactions, and the authors explored the
literature on networks and stakeholder theories commonly applied in the studies of
legitimacy. This was another point when the author redirected her research (Dubois and
Gadde, 2002).
68



Simultaneously, the influence of the social structure must still be recognised and there was a
need to account for elements other than relationships such as values, and processes. The
search of appropriate theoretical lens was expanded to other social disciplines, first and
foremost, strategic management and public management literatures and specifically where
the focus has been exclusively made on TSOs. The PAM literature has been an important
reference point from the outset of the current study because TSOs were frequently
considered in the context of public service delivery. The author’s embeddedness in the
faculty’s network of fellow PhD students and academic staff facilitated the discovery process
because the author had general knowledge of the concepts of public value and public service
delivery, which constitute an important stream of research in the PAM literature. The authors
in this stream of literature operate with the concept of ecosystems and a growing interest is
paid to the application of the ecosystems approach in the study of complex phenomena. At
this point the ecosystem framework was incorporated into the study as the core theoretical
perspective because it can offer new lens to the study of TSO legitimacy and uncover new
insights.
As was demonstrated, the abductive reasoning does not follow a predetermined set of rules
because abductive analysis implies creativity on behalf of the researcher in the identification
of a more appropriate theoretical lens that can improve understanding of the empirical
material (Alvesson and Kärreman, 2007; Coffey and Atkinson, 1996). Accordingly, abductive
research is recursive and iterative (Timmermans and Tavory, 2012).

3.3 Research Strategy
3.3.1 Qualitative research strategy
Qualitative research strategy is used to illuminate processes and examine how changes affect
every day organisational activities (Barbour, 2008). A case study shows an explicit preference
for contextualism (Bryman, 1988) and locates the meaning people give to their own and
others’ behaviour in the context of the values, practices, and underlying structures of the
appropriate entity (Richards and Morse, 2007; Marshall and Rossman, 1995). A qualitative
strategy is applied in research that emphasizes description and explanation rather than on
prediction (Hakim, 2000).

69



In contrast, quantitative research conveys a view that social reality is static, and it tends to
ignore the impact of change on social life (Bryman, 1988). While both research traditions
examine connections between variables, quantitative research is interested in determining
the relative influence of individual variables or a cluster of related variables (Creswell, 2014).
Qualitative research has the advantage of unpacking the mechanisms which link events and
exploring people’s interpretations of the factors which produce such connections (Barbour,
2008). The potential of the qualitative strategy to provide rich descriptions is therefore in line
with the requirements of the critical realist approach outlined earlier.
Qualitative research is a subjective enquiry and qualitative researchers cannot be naturally
separated from the research and remain neutral; instead, they must admit that their views
and values and past experiences can influence the outcome of research (Guba and Lincoln,
1994). In line with the author’s philosophical position, the researcher cannot remain a distant
and neutral observer. An understanding of legitimacy will be co-created in the research
process where the views and experiences of the participants co-exist with the prior
knowledge and views of the researcher.
The present study does not aim to break down the perceptions of legitimacy for the purpose
of converting it into a set of measurable units, associated with positivist, quantitative
approaches. In fact, much research into legitimacy struggled to convert legitimacy into a
measurable construct, and tended to use less direct, proxy measures instead. For example,
Deephouse (1996) used content analysis of media articles to measure public endorsement.
The purpose is to explore the interactions and processes that underpin legitimacy of an
organisation, and how values, norms and beliefs are related to it. It is thus believed that a
qualitative approach is more suitable to reveal these complexities.

3.3.2 Case study
There is considerable variability in approaches to undertaking a qualitative study (Creswell,
2007). However, as argued by Yin (2003), the case study method is preferred when contextual
conditions are highly relevant in the study of the object. Case study research concerns an
examination of one or several real-life case examples of the phenomena in their real-life
context (Eriksson and Kovalainen, 2016).

70



Case studies allow for an intensive investigation of new topic areas in a manner that is not
restricted by limited or narrowly defined variables (Eisenhardt, 1989). Case study research
produces rich amount of detailed information about the case (Hammersley et al., 2000) and
when exploring the empirical context with case studies, the findings are not constrained to a
set of a priori and quantitatively measurable variables (Eisenhardt and Graebner, 2007).
Case study designs are not tied to any philosophical position and can be used to accomplish
multiple objectives (Eriksson and Kovalainen, 2016). As Dubois and Gadde (2002, p. 558) point
out, in abductive case study research "the evolving framework is a cornerstone.” They suggest
that prior concepts should provide initial guidance to the researcher in the early stages of the
qualitative inquiry. As the research unfolds, the researcher must be open to the multitude of
meanings that a certain concept can give rise to. “The refinement of concepts constitutes
input, as well as output of an abductive study” (Dubois and Gadde, 2002, p. 558). Thomas
(2016, p. 70) argues that “making a judgement concerning the best explanation for the facts
you are collecting” constitutes the core of an abductive approach in case study research.
The case study design employed in the study has an explanatory purpose (Thomas, 2016)
because of the focus on unpacking the multiple dimensions of legitimacy and looking at the
interrelationships between them. The case study approach is both theoretically and
practically appropriate to the research question. As outlined by Hakim (2000), the
fundamental difference between case-studies and other types of qualitative research such as
depth-interviews and focus groups is that while the latter is concerned with obtaining
people’s own accounts of situations and events, with reporting their perspectives and
feelings, case study research is concerned with obtaining a rounded picture of a situation from
the perspectives of all the persons involved, using a variety of methods and sources of
information. Its focus is on analytical social units and social processes rather than individuals
(Blaikie, 2010); the individual, group or event are treated as a whole (Goode and Hatt, 1952).
The fieldwork for case-studies may incorporate the analysis of administrative records and
other documents, in-depth interviews, larger-scale structured surveys, participant, and nonparticipant observation and virtually any type of evidence that is relevant and available (Yin,
2003). The use of multiple sources of evidence in obtaining more rounded accounts of social
issues and processes makes the case study one of the most powerful research designs
(Simons, 2009). This research design is appropriate because it allows researchers to
71



investigate phenomena as they occur in the context, not aiming to control or measure
variables but to benefit from rich contextual data that can be obtained in a multitude of ways
(Thomas, 2016).

3.3.3 Multiple case study design
Within case study research, analysis can be undertaken for a single case or for multiple cases
(Lee and Saunders, 2019). As Clark et al. (2021) suggest in case studies it is crucial to be clear
about what the unit of analysis is. Thomas (2016, p.18) writes that in every case there is the
subject or “the lens through which we view the object” and the object or “the thing to be
explicated and analysed.” The subject is the case itself (e.g., person, place), and the object
denotes the theoretical topic that the subject allows to explore in detail. Thus, the object of
this study is legitimation processes occurring within an ecosystem while the subject are the
organisations included in the study.
A key decision in the design of case study research concerns the number of cases to be
included in the study, which usually involves trade-offs on the side of the researcher (Thomas,
2016). On the one hand, a single case allows gaining a greater detail and richness in the data
and helps develop an in-depth understanding of the phenomena under study but could
narrow the focus of the study to a very limited context (Dubois and Gadde, 2002). On the
other hand, the study of two or more cases extends the focus of the study beyond one
particular situation or context but this comes at a cost of a loss of depth.
Similarly, Hammersley et al. (2000) argue that where the aim of the case study is description
and explanation, the task is to provide a comprehensive coverage of what occurred and why,
and this requires a particular attention to distinctive features of those cases. As such, the
study has adopted multiple case study. The main argument in favour of the multiple case
study is that it improves theory building (Clark et al., 2021). A multiple case study design is
also called cross-case analysis because each particular case has less importance than the
comparison it offers (Stake, 2005; Thomas, 2016). It is suggested that by comparing the
findings from several cases the researcher can identify the circumstances in which a theory
will or will not hold (Yin, 2017). Comparisons can reveal the factors unique to each case study
and facilitate theorisation of the study’s findings (Bryman and Bell, 2015).

72



Multiple case study designs can be either multiple-single or multiple-embedded (Yin, 2017).
A multiple-single case design involves two or more cases each of which are analysed
separately as whole units. Conversely, in an embedded multiple case design, analysis is
conducted on each of the subunits occurring in two or more case studies. The distinction
between the designs is thus determined by the number of units of analysis within each case
(Blaikie, 2010). This study adopted the multiple-embedded case study design because it
concerned the viewpoints of legitimacy from multiple perspectives of the organisational
leaders, the staff, the young people, and the funders. The details of the sampling procedures
and the selected sample are contained in the next section.

3.4 Empirical study
3.4.1 Sample and sampling
Sampling decisions in qualitative research are crucial as they can affect the credibility and
trustworthiness of the findings (Marshall and Rossman, 1995). To facilitate credible, but novel
insights, the cases cannot be chosen arbitrarily (Langley and Abdallah, 2011). To achieve this
within case study research, it is suggested to select samples purposefully (Gummesson, 2017;
Saunders et al., 2019). The logic and power of purposeful sampling lie in selecting
information-rich cases for an in-depth study of a phenomenon (Patton, 1990). Such sampling
is essentially strategic and entails an attempt to establish a good correspondence between
research questions and those sampled (Bryman, 2016).
Stake (2005) suggests that the focus in case study research should not be on sampling per se
because case study researchers tend to work with a small number of cases. Instead, the
author recommends choosing a case based on its potential to facilitate learning and as
perceived by the researcher, rather than choosing cases which are seemingly “typical”.
Accordingly, there is no consensus in the literature as to what an “adequate” number of cases
should be (Bryman and Bell, 2015). Studying information-rich cases yields insights and indepth understandings rather than empirical generalisations (Patton, 2002). Subsequently, the
quality of case study and the extent to which the findings from it can be generalised should
be judged according to different factors irrespective of whether it is a single or multiple case
study (Dubois and Gadde, 2002).

73



According to Stake (1995) the most important criterion in case selection is learning
maximization. The logic of case selection was thus information oriented (Flyvbjerg, 2006) but
was also influenced by the practical limitations imposed by Covid, i.e., were based on the
willingness of organisations to participate in the research. Fifteen different strategies are
suggested by Patton (1990) for purposefully selecting cases (Appendix 3). Following this
classification, this study employed a combination of criterion and emergent sampling.
Criterion sampling involves reviewing and studying all cases that meet some predetermined
criteria (Patton, 2002). This approach implies developing explicit inclusion/exclusion criteria.
Emergent or opportunistic sampling occurs during fieldwork, and “on the spot” decisions are
made because the case or the person is viewed to be important to the study.
Criterion sampling determined criteria to which the case study organisations must conform.
As mentioned in the opening of this chapter, the research necessitated a new orientation
soon after the start of the first lockdown. Three but one case study organisation withdrew
from the study. Most relevant organisations from the list of the 280 organisations that
obtained social investment had been contacted previously and the remaining organisations
either did not meet the definition of the third sector outlined earlier (e.g., represented social
firms) or were very large charities. Rather than selecting from a narrow database of 280 TSOs,
a decision was made to expand the search and the original research question.
The one case study organisation that remained in the original sample provided a range of
social services for the young people and was a mid-sized charity. A decision was made to
maintain the focus on these two characteristics and use them as selection criteria to match
all other organisations in the sample. TSOs vary greatly in terms of their characteristics. These
matching criteria helped put some boundaries around case study organisations and increased
the chance that information-rich cases were selected. Criteria can reduce potential “noise” in
data as studying too heterogenous sites may not allow meaningful comparisons.
The rationale for the selected criteria was not solely based on the characteristics of the
remaining organisation. The criteria were deemed to give the most in-depth and relevant
information. The search engine of the Scottish charity register returned the highest number
of charities who are associated with “young people” when results were filtered by
“beneficiaries”. The initial search generated a potential “sampling frame” of 1,778 TSOs to
choose from, larger than the list of 280 organisations with social investment who had already
74



been contacted previously and were unlikely to participate, and larger than the number of
organisations that support other user groups (e.g., older people, communities, asylum
seekers). In addition, more TSOs working with young people were identified manually when
“young people” were used as keywords in the search engine.
It was decided to exclude large organisations from further consideration because they are
likely to be too complex in terms of their organisational structure, hierarchy, and decisionmaking and require more resources on the side of the researcher than are feasible for
doctoral researchers and especially in a time of a global pandemic with its associated
lockdowns. Yet, the third sector stats have shown that large charities tend to deliver large
government contracts, and the study could have been skewed towards this source of income.
Small charities in contrast constitute the majority of the third sector but are likely to have a
narrow focus and fewer income streams.
Medium sized charitable organisations with annual incomes of between £100k and £1m have
seen more significant declines in income due to public spending cuts (Clifford, 2017). The
question of how legitimacy can support organisational survival of medium-sized charities
under tightening financial constraints is thus both topical and critical.
Yet, as Stake (2000, p. 451) suggests, qualitative researchers should select cases which “build
in variety and acknowledge opportunities for intensive study”. In this respect the selected
four charities present particularly interesting cases for analysis because they are located in
different local authorities giving a good opportunity to explore the local institutional
arrangements and their links to organisational legitimacy, among which could be their
relationships with the local authority.
Suri (2011) suggests that emergent sampling suits situations when the purpose evolves in
response to the changing needs of the researcher. The element of opportunistic sampling
concerned the author’s subjective decision to choose a particular organisation for the study
on the spot. As Bernard (2017) note an important consideration in purposive sampling is the
availability and willingness of individuals to participate. In the context of the lockdown and
the spread of the pandemic at that point in time it was one of the key factors that the author
considered in the introductory call with a potential participant organisation. Albeit efforts
were made to minimize the variability of case-studies in terms of age (previous studies have
found it to be related to legitimacy), practically it turned out to be an unachievable task.
75



This sampling therefore was guided by a combination of principled and pragmatic decisionmaking. The selected charities are thus medium-sized charities providing a range of services
to young people (Table 3.1). According to the International Classification of Non-Profitmaking
Organisations taxonomy adapted and used by SCVO, the four charities fall under the category
of Social Care (please see Appendix 4 for full details of the classification system), and these
social care TSOs represent 30% of all registered charities in Scotland (SCVO, 2022).
Table 3.1 Characteristics of case study organisations
Case

Focus

Transitions
Support Service
[TSS]

Training,
employment,
health, housing
support
Education, health,
employment,
recreational
activities
Group activities,
befriending, and
mentoring

Employment
Training and
Recreation [ETR]
Animal and Play
Therapy [APT]

Dance Sport and
Tech [DST]

Education, health,
encouragement of
the arts

Income
as of
20204 (£)
696,916

Major Sources (£)

Grants-689,802
Ddonations-5,356
Investments–
1,758
Grants-264,673
Trading-129,092

393,775

460,963

468,766

Grants-287,679
Trading-157,828
Donations –
10,597
Investments-4,859
Grants-110,652
Trading- 355,614
Donations– 2,500

Grants
as % of
Total
99

Geographical
Coverage
More than one local
authority area in
Scotland

67

A specific local point,
community, or
neighbourhood

62

Wider, but within
one local authority
area

24

More than one local
authority area in
Scotland

Source: data is compiled from the financial statements of the case study organisations and
the Scottish Charity Regulator’s website

The funding structures of the selected case study organisations differ, not only among each
other, but also in comparison with the third sector (key sector statistics in Scotland was
presented in Section 2.1.4 in the literature review chapter). The proportion of grants in the
overall funding mix of the selected organisations ranges from 24% to 99% while other sources
of income include SE activity, service level agreements with local authorities, and to a smaller
extent, donations, and investments. DST has the highest proportion of earned income (76%),

4

The table shows the latest pre-pandemic financial figures for the charities (before March 2020). This ensures
the financial figures are not skewed by the pandemic period, during which the charities’ commercial income
shrank while simultaneously a number of UK wide emergency funds and Scottish Government funding were
made available to support the third sector. The financial year for DST and APT ends on 31 December while for
TSS and ETR on 31 March.

76



ETR and APT have similar proportions and TSS is almost solely reliant on grants. According to
the OSCR’s classification, the charities fall under the category of medium-sized, however TSS
has the larger income than the other three charities. The varying proportions of grant income
in the overall funding structures of the TSOs was believed to present an interesting
comparative lens, through which legitimacy could be explored.
Transitions Support Service (TSS) is a local charity working with young people to help them
manage the transition from adolescence to young adulthood. It offers a range of services
including training for young people, employment assistance, assistance in the relief of mental
and/or physical disability, provision of housing, and advancing education. Its funding is largely
composed of grants from both the statutory and voluntary organisations (99%).
Dance Sport and Tech (DST) is another local charity that aims to promote opportunities for
the educationally, socially, and rurally disadvantaged by encouragement of the arts including
dance, music, and sports. Recently, it has started to focus on the use of advanced technologies
in their service delivery. The proportion of grant financing in its funding is 24%.
Employment Training and Recreation (ETR) is a charity that supports young people by
providing employment opportunities and running after-school clubs and weekend excursions.
Their employability support includes employability and training programs, as well as focused
1-1 work. The proportion of grant financing in its funding structure is 67%.
Animal and Play Therapy (APT) uses the principles of equine assisted learning to improve
social skills, confidence, assertiveness, and communication of vulnerable young people on a
referral basis. These young people are generally experiencing social, emotional and/or
behavioural issues. The proportion of grant financing in its funding structure is 62%.
In addition to the charities, separate data from 15 funders was collected for the study. These
are the funding bodies associated with the case study organisations who have either funded
them in the past or were providing funding at the time when data collection was carried out.
The funders in the sample differ in several respects (Table 3.2). Most of the funders have been
in existence for more than 30 years including few funders whose history goes back to 1930s.
The sample includes four trusts, six registered charities, two local councils, and three public
sector organisations. The funders have a different geographical focus. Five of them operate
in a narrow geographical area in Scotland, another five cover the whole of Scotland, and five
77



operate on a national/international scale. The smallest funder in the sample, F10, distributes
roughly £240,000 a year, and the biggest funder, F11, has a budget of about £600 million.
Each funder has a funding focus that they variously refer to as funding themes, priorities, or
programs. Full details of the funders including their mission, founder, funding themes and
other relevant data are included in Appendix 5.
Table 3.2 Characteristics of funders
Funder

F1

Year
Set
up
1985

Constitutional Form

Geographical
Spread

Examples of Funding
Themes

UK and
internationally

Children survive and thrive

F2
F3

1975
1992

£3
£9.92

East Lothian
Scotland

CLG and registered
Scottish charity
Public sector
organisation
CLG and registered
charity
Local council

£9.14

Scotland

£0.25

Musselburgh

£2.42

UK-wide

Social isolation/befriending
Improving life skills,
education, and
employability
Youth training and
unemployment
Transport and educational
attainment
Sport, culture, and the arts

F4

2008

F5

2014

F6

2005

F7

1994

£0.3

Scottish Broders

F8

1977

F9

1937

CLG and registered
charity
Unincorporated trust

£7.59

UK wide

£4.1

Primarily Perth and
Kinross, but also
across Scotland
The City of Dundee,
Angus, Perth and
Kinross and Fife
UK wide

F10

1936

Trust

£0.3

F11

2006

Non-departmental
public body

F12

1972

Trust

£588.2
(£38.9 in
Scotland)
£3.24

F13

1963

Trust

F14

1963

F15

2014

Company limited by
guarantee (CLG) and
registered charity
Local council
CLG and registered
Scottish charity

Funding
(£mln,
2020)
£65.8

Advancement of citizenship
or community development
Alcohol and substance
misuse
To improve the quality of
life
The advancement of the
education of adult persons
Supporting thriving
communities

Dundee and the
Tayside area

Addressing deprivation,
poverty, and inequality

£19.4

Scotland

CLG and a registered
charity

£1.71

Scotland

Public sector
organisation

£14.93

Scotland

Emotional wellbeing and
relationships
Support young people most
affected by social isolation
and loneliness
Responsible consumption

Source: annual reports and websites of the funding institutions

78



3.4.2 Data collection methods
The research design guides the selection of a research method and the analysis of the
subsequent data (Bryman, 2016). Legitimacy “resides in the eye of the beholder” (Ashforth
and Gibbs, 1990) and the construal of a social object as legitimate in a local situation involves
“an implicit and sometimes explicit process in which widespread consensual beliefs about
how things should be or typically are done creates strong expectations for what is likely to
occur in that local situation” (Johnson et al., 2016, p.72). Therefore, to explore the
perceptions of legitimacy and the nature of processes underpinning it, it was important to
collect empirical interview data as well as observation data. This allowed an exploration of
the different dimensions of legitimacy other than the funder-fundee relationship, and an
explanation of how these dimensions interact in the legitimation process. Document analysis
was also performed with the purpose of establishing when the changes in the funding mix
occurred and identifying the key antecedent events. The data collected from the case study
organisations is presented in Table 3.3. For clarity, the data from the funders is shown
separately in Table 3.4. The next section of this chapter therefore is going to discuss each data
collection methods used within this thesis in greater detail.
Table 3.3 Data collected from case study organisations (excluding data from funders)
APT
DST
ETR

Case study

# of interviews
11
7
13

TSS

15

Observations
1 general visit
3 general visits
1 visit (including annual
general meeting)
Finance group meeting
and board meeting

Documents
Annual accounts,
strategic plans, website,
newspaper articles,
social media posts

Table 3.4 Data collected from funders
Funder
F1-F15

Data collected
18 interviews
15 funding application forms
15 annual reports and financial statements
6 strategic plans
13 websites

3.4.2.1 Interviews
Interviews remain one of the most popular data collection methods in qualitative research
(Bryman and Bell, 2015). TSOs may be complex organisations, involved in many different
79



activities and relationships, driven by values, and beliefs as to what aims should be pursued
and how. There are several types of interview methods depending on the extent of
standardisation of its questions and the flexibility that it gives to both the interviewer and
interviewee (Saunders et al., 2019).
Structured interviews follow a pre-determined order, and the same instrument is applied to
all respondents while unstructured interviews tend to be very similar in character to a
conversation in that it is guided by broadly defined themes and follows a different path
depending on the information provided (Bryman and Bell, 2015). The semi-structured
interviews are a hybrid between structured and unstructured interviews. This format allows
the interviewer to balance the pre-planned questions of a structured approach with the
spontaneity and flexibility of the unstructured interview (Salmons, 2011). The interviewer
asks about a set of themes using some predetermined questions but has the option to change
the order in which the themes are covered, and questions asked (Saunders et al., 2019).
Accordingly, semi-structured method of interviewing was selected. Unlike the structured
interview, the semi-structured interview balances the preplanned questions of a structured
approach with the spontaneity and flexibility of the unstructured interview giving the
researcher a degree of flexibility (Bryman and Bell, 2015). The semi-structured format is used
to probe the respondents’ experiences and interpretations during the interview process
(Rubin and Rubin, 2005). It allows the researcher to cover the relevant themes of interest
while at the same time including topics not previously considered or otherwise omitting topics
irrelevant to the interviewee (Saunders et al., 2019). Compared to unstructured interviewing,
it also has a clear focus and ensures that the case study organisations can be meaningfully
compared.
The interviews were conducted with the CEOs, trustees, and project workers and the details
are provided in Table 3.5. Due to Covid, with few exceptions the interviews for this study were
conducted online via online video conferencing platforms. For this research, online interviews
or e-interviews refer to “in-depth interviews conducted with computer-mediated
communications” (Salmons, 2011, p.5).

80



Table 3.5 Interviews conducted in relation to each case study (including funders)
Interviewees and Position
CEO
Director of Children’s Services/Project worker
Chair
Project worker 1
Project worker 2
Head of Convening and Approaches
Quality Improvement Manager
Funding Manager 1
Grants Manager
CEO
Trustee 1
Trustee 2
Employment and Revenue Officer/ project worker
Operations Manager/project worker
Programme Manager
Founder
Head of Philanthropy and Quality
Head of Charitable Giving
Chairman
Depute CEO and National Programmes Manager
Fund Manager 1
Manager/CEO
Fundraising co-ordinator
Chairman
Trustee
Assistant Manager/project worker
Project worker/service user 1
Project worker/service user 2
Grants Manager
Funding Officer 2
Head of Philanthropy and Quality
Funding Officer
Fund Manager 1
Community Programmes Advisor
CEO
Fundraiser
Project worker 1
Project worker 2
Project worker 3
Project worker 4
Project worker 5
Project worker 6
Project worker 7
Project worker 8
Project worker 9
Project worker 10
Trustee 1
Trustee 2
Fund Manager 2
Chair
Head of Communities
Grants Manager
Community Programmes Advisor
Head of Open Grants

81

Organisation
APT
APT
APT
APT
APT
F1
F7
F13
F9
DST
DST
DST
DST
DST
F15
Partner
F3
F12
F10
F14
F4
ETR
ETR
ETR
ETR
ETR
ETR
ETR
F9
F13
F3
F11
F4
F6
TSS
TSS
TSS
TSS
TSS
TSS
TSS
TSS
TSS
TSS
TSS
TSS
TSS
TSS
F4
F5
F2
F9
F6
F8

Interview
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
3
3
1
1
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Duration
1:05, 1:01
1:10, 1:01
1:03
0:33
0:31
1:00
0:42
1:07
0:59
1:13, 1:24, 1:37
0:27
1:32
1:23
0:54
1:07
1:00
1:00
1:07
1:00
1:00
1:04, 1:16
1:01, 1:17, 0:23
1:24, 1:37, 1:05
1:02
0:20
0:56, 0:52
0:30, 0:58
0:30
0:59
0:58
1:00
0:58
1:04, 1:16
1:00
1:00, 0:59
0:55
0:30
0:30
0:30
0:30
0:30
0:30
0:30
0:30
0:30
0:30
1:04
1:00
1:00
1:14
1:00
0:59
1:00
1:00



While information and communications technologies allow for a full range of visual and verbal
exchanges, the focus of this study is on the types of information and communications
technologies that enable real-time dialogue between researchers and participants. These are
also called synchronous communications technologies in which communication process is
conducted in real-time and involves audio, textual as well as video/visual exchanges (Cleland
et al., 2020). Synchronous approaches allow more control over the continuity and flow of the
communication compared to asynchronous tools (Hewson et al., 2017) and thus were the
preferred choice.
As argued by James and Busher (2016) online interviews are not less authentic than offline
interviews as they follow fundamental steps and thinking involved in any research. Online
data collection methods are generally associated with lower costs and time-efficiency, easier
access to a pool of vast and geographically diverse participants (Cleland et al., 2020; Hewson,
2017). However, online communications are experienced differently, and researchers need
to consider critically the data that they obtain and interpret and its authenticity (Salmons,
2011).
The main concern that has been raised with respect to the online methods is the lack of
extralinguistic cues normally available in offline interactions (Hewson, 2017). These may
introduce potential ambiguities and misunderstandings to communicative exchanges.
However, a number of studies have reported that careful rapport building techniques in
online communications can eliminate the negative effects associated with the lack of proximal
contact with participants and produce rich, high-quality data (Archibald et al., 2019; Gray et
al., 2020; Jenner and Myers, 2019). In this sense, traditional and online interviews are no
different because traditionally good rapport has been instrumental in producing rich and
candid responses in qualitative interview data (Barratt, 2012).
Busher and James (2012) suggest that standards of authenticity should be seen as
situationally negotiated and sustained and the researchers’ role is to facilitate open and
honest dialogue with the respondent. Prior to the actual interview, the author spent some
time presenting herself and getting to know the respondent better. The author disclosed
relevant information about herself and introduced the topic of the study, talked about her
motivations of doing the research, her program of studies and what she had already learned
about funding. This was a good starting point because the participants could relate to many
82



observations made by the author, and funding was the topic they were eager to talk about.
The participants were then asked to share more information about themselves. These
opening questions formed a good base for a subsequent dialogue with the respondents. As
the conversation unfolded, the author asked more substantive questions whilst questions
that might be viewed as sensitive and related to the nature of their relationships with the
funders were postponed to a later point in the interview. The author practiced using probes,
which are deemed important in any qualitative interview to maintain conversations,
encourage the participant to provide more details and increase the sense of rapport (Rubin
and Rubin, 2012).
Another commonly cited advantage of online methods is the potential reduction of social
desirability effects due to heightened levels of anonymity and perceived privacy (Hewson,
2017). However, these advantages may apply more to asynchronous forms of online data
collection methods whereby the researcher and the respondent do not interact directly and
in real time. The interviews in the study were conducted in the format of a video call where
the researcher and the participant could see each other, and the effects of the researcher’s
presence, attitudes, or mode of asking specific questions on the interviewees’ responses must
be recognised (Bryman and Bell, 2015; Creswell, 2014). A more relevant advantage of online
methods for the study is that they may increase participation opportunities from the
enhanced control that participants have over how, when, and where to participate. Although
in practice the participants could not choose between the face-to-face and online interviews
at that time, this feature of online interviews was helpful considering the work pressures and
increased demand for services that the participants experienced due to Covid.
Additional Interviews
As mentioned previously in the chapter, prior to her involvement with the selected case study
organisations, the author conducted interviews with other third sector practitioners. These
interviews have largely informed the development of the present study as the author gained
a better sense of the funding context and the major financing mechanism used in the third
sector. However, these interviews were not included as part of the study. Whilst the
interviews provided some interesting themes to explore, for example, the use of creative
packaging or presenting a project in a way that appeals to the funder, or how contractual
arrangements differ from the dynamics of charitable giving, it was felt that they detracted
83



from the core purpose of the thesis. This is because the mechanisms are indeed diverse and
underpinned by different processes depending on the source. Whilst these are all interesting
questions, they could be explored in further detail in future research.
3.4.2.2 Participant observation
Because of the Covid restrictions, the use of semi-structured interviews formed the core of
the study as they were deemed most accessible and relevant tools to obtain data. The
interviews helped elicit perceptions of the participants that cannot be directly observed by
the researcher, facilitated the reconstruction of key events in the organisational history and
the identifications of the rationale behind the key actions and behaviours relevant to the
study of legitimacy (Creswell, 2014; Bryman, 2016). Nevertheless, in addition to interview,
the study employed participant observation.
Participant observation is a qualitative data collection technique “in which the researcher is
immersed in a social setting for some time in order to observe and listen with a view to gaining
an appreciation of the social group” (Bell et al., 2022, p. 363). Therefore, observations can
uncover insights that are more difficult to capture, for example, in interviews, because
observations may reveal implicit problems and provide an insight into more informal aspects
of interactions and relations (Patton, 2002). Creswell (2014) suggests that by observing
processes as they occur, researchers have access to information in real-time and can notice
the emergence of relevant issues that were previously ignored or note any discrepancies in
what was shared by participants previously in interviews. Consequently, observations are
considered as powerful tools for triangulation in studies relying on interviews or based on
claims of participants in general (Bryman, 2016).
Observer roles can be either overt or covert and apply to both online and offline observations
(Nørskov and Rask, 2011). In overt observation the researcher obtains permission to observe
a situation and participants are informed about the intentions and objectives of the
researcher. The research is considered covert when the participants consider the researcher
as a group member and are unaware of the researcher's identity (Jorgensen, 1989; Stafford
and Stafford, 1993). There are ethical implications associated with both types of observation,
but in this study, the researcher adopted an overt role because it enables full and free
informed consent of participants and helps maintain the ethical integrity of the study.

84



Four observational approaches are proposed in the literature. The approaches differ in terms
of the extent to which the researcher is assimilated into the social setting: 1. the complete
participant, 2. the participant-as-observer, 3. the observer-as-participant and 4. the complete
observer (Saunders et al., 2019). In this research, the observer-as-participant role was
assumed. In this stance the researcher is involved in social interaction with the informants
but does not pretend to be an actual group member (Babbie, 1986). This role implies more
observation than participation, and the relationships that bound the researcher and the
informants remain research-related (Adler and Adler, 1994).
Once again, it should be noted that the data collection was carried out in the context of lasting
lockdowns, self-isolation requirements and travel restrictions. Interactions were reduced to
a minimum against the backdrop of the public’s growing fear for the spread of the virus and
mounting uncertainty. Case study organisations operated on a reduced capacity and agreed
to participate on a limited basis. Most of their staff were furloughed, and the few staff who
remained assumed the increased workload. The case study organisations suggested that that
they were unable to make long-term commitments to research and engage in on-going and
lasting communications with the researcher due to the practical constraints. In addition, the
staff was working from home which precluded the author from carrying out observations in
their traditional sense, i.e., in person observing real-life interactions of the staff members as
they occur in their work context. Practically speaking the base on which participant
observations can be carried out significantly reduced. The online meetings of the staff that
were held soon after the beginning of the first lockdown were Covid-related and concerned
changes in work practices. Only two online board meetings were observed in the later period,
and it was not until the autumn of 2021 after some of the restrictions on the face-to-face
interactions had been lifted and the charities started to open their physical premises that the
regular observations became possible. The author paid a full-day visit to two charities and a
half-day visit to another. The details of the observations performed are provided in Table 3.6.
The study thus employed a mixture of “physical” participant observation and online
observation due to the pandemic, which was dictated by the general conditions in which the
study was undertaken at that point in time. Online observation is a “research method that
involves selective and detailed viewing, monitoring, acquisition and recording of online
phenomena” (Dawson, 2020, p. 274).
85



Table 3.6 Details of observations performed
Case
study
APT

Observations

Duration

Date

A full day visit
The researcher visited the premises where the researcher was shown
round the yard and the stables with the horses, the main office and the
cabin log (for activities). The researcher observed the staff at work, and
how they communicate with young people. Different activities were
taking place on that day including the riding lessons, group activities in
the field (APT occupies a large piece of land with woods, hills, and
fields), and the regular work on the yard such as taking care of the
horses, cleaning the stables, hacking, etc. The researcher met some of
the service users and spoke with a group of pupils from the local high
school. The researcher also observed the staff informal meetings and
discussions of work-related matters.

7:00

20 October
2021

3 half-day visits pre- and post-pandemic
The first was an introductory visit where the researcher met with the
CEO. She was then taken around the premises spread across three large
warehouses where she was talked through the different activities that
take place there. The researcher spoke with some of the staff and
observed them at work. That visit was marked by the experience of VR
technology offered by the staff of DST.

3:05

4 April 2019

The second visit took place days before the first lockdown. During the
visit the researcher observed how the users, and the diverse public
were using the building, many of whom were locals. The researcher
observed a meeting between the CEO and Deputy Chair of DST who also
runs her business from the premises.

3:30

6 March
2020

The third visit took place after most of the travel restrictions were
lifted. The researcher could meet more staff of DST and observe them
at work. This visit was marked by an observation of a football session
with young people who were disengaged from school. Some of them,
however, were former service users who were supported by DST but
who can still come back to use the premises for free.

4:10

28
September
2021

ETR

A full-day visit (plus Annual General Meeting)
The researcher spent a day with the organisation, where she was shown
around the hostel, the function room, the pods with the views to Ben
Ledi, the newly equipped kitchen, and other facilities where the
activities are run. The researcher also had a walk in the town known as
a tourist hub for its favourable geographical position. The researcher
observed the staff at work. No youth club activities were run but the
researcher spoke with current MAs and former service users. Later in
the evening, the researcher attended the annual general meeting and
met the current trustees and some of the funders who were in
attendance.

8:00

3 November
2021

TSS

Finance meeting (online)
The researcher observed the finance meeting that takes place before
every Board meeting. This meeting is held between the CEO, Head of
Finance group and Financial Manager. Various financial issues were

2:20

8 April 2021

DST

86



discussed, e.g., funding applied for and received, plans to develop paidfor services, and how this should be managed.
Board Meeting (online)
The meeting involved the CEO, Financial Manager and seven trustees.
Various strategic, operational, and financial matters were covered. The
attendees discussed the relationships with the parent charity, issues
with the lease renewal, plans to offer paid-for courses to external
organisations, the reserves policy, plans to open the building and many
other matters. At the end the CEO shared a presentation of the
strategic plan for the next 5-year period covering beneficiaries, funding,
sustainability, Covid learning, management structure, young
ambassadors, staff, and raising TSS' profile.

2:50

22 April
2021

Online participant observation can be carried out within any online community, network, or
group (Nørskov and Rask, 2011). In the present study, online observation of the two board
meetings was performed for one participating case study organisation. As with physical
observation, the researcher’s role was overt, and prior to the start of the meeting the
researcher was given an opportunity to present herself and explain why she was interested
in the meetings. She was also given a chance to ask clarifying questions and hear the
“collective response” to some of her questions. The analysis of the overall dynamics of the
meetings and how they unfolded provided the researcher with more subtle clues that would
have been difficult to uncover in interviews, for example, about the nature of relationships
between the CEO and the board, and whether there were many disagreements in the
discussions among the members, and how as the collective they reacted to perceived threats
to legitimacy. In the hindsight, the online observations of board meetings were one of the
most informative sources of data for that particular case study organisation and going forward
can be a rich source of data.
The full day visits were equally informative in terms of seeing the premises and meeting the
staff (and some service users) face-to-face. Like in interviews, the researcher’s presence may
change the pattern of communication or influence a participant’s behaviour, be
misinterpreted, or result in the unwillingness of participants to share information (Denzin,
1989; Creswell, 2014). These potential issues must be acknowledged in advance by
researchers. Participant observation in this study was carried out after the interviews with
the staff. Most of the staff had met the researcher before for the online interviews. While this
fact does not eliminate any potential bias, it nevertheless made communications easier and
87



smoother and facilitated observations. The staff were welcoming, and let the researcher
freely observe their work while the researcher attempted to be as less intrusive as possible.
In this study, the observations provided valuable insights into the culture of these
organisations and the shared beliefs and organisational norms. The interactions among the
staff were particularly important. As the study adopted a complex view of legitimacy that is
shaped by, among other things, the values and beliefs of the individual involved, it is only
when the staff interact that it becomes clearer how their professional and individual beliefs
influence decisions and more importantly whose values prevail. For example, by observing
the interactions between the staff and the CEO at DST it became clear that DST was to a large
degree shaped by what the CEO believed was appropriate to do.
3.4.2.3 Document Analysis
Document analysis was also used alongside the semi-structured interviews and observations
and was a tool to verify what the participants had said within the interview. Documents can
exist in multiple formats and may for example, include written reports, minutes of meetings,
audio-visual material, newspaper articles, and posts on social media (Creswell, 2014).
This study collected secondary sources of information such as publicly available organisational
documents and internal reports (Table 3.7). The purpose of document analysis was to help
build a more holistic and comprehensive picture of the organisations and to explore the
funding patterns and how they developed over time. These documents allowed
reconstruction of the history of the organisations as they contained descriptions of some key
events and decisions. The analysis helped establish when the changes in the funding mix
occurred and identify the key antecedent events. In other words, documents helped uncover
some of the contextual factors linked with the changes in funding such as relocation to a new
area, change in leadership or an introduction of new service.
The study also collected the relevant documents from the funders. These included funding
application forms, which were analysed to get a gauge of the funders’ requirements to TSOs,
their annual accounts, strategic plans, and other publicly available information.

88



Table 3.7 Documents collected from case study organisations
Case study
APT
DST
ETR
TSS

Documents
Annual report and financial statements 2009-2022, website, videos, social media posts
Annual report and financial statements 2006-2022, website, videos, newspaper articles,
social media posts
Annual report and financial statements 2004-2022, website, videos, social media posts
Annual report and financial statements 2006-2022, strategic plan presentation, website,
videos, social media posts

3.4.2.4 Data collection protocols
The interview guides were piloted to check the clarity of the questions and ensure that these
would provide data needed to address the research questions of this study. The pilot
interviews were conducted with participants from two organisations with characteristics
comparable with the case study organisations, i.e., medium-sized and supporting young
people. Their feedback helped adjust some of the questions by, for example, improving the
wording of some. The interview guides are included in Appendix 6.
The study did not follow any observation protocols. Instead, they had an unstructured format.
Given the few observations that could be carried out due to the pandemic, the unstructured
format would provide more detailed data. The case study organisations in turn did not
request the researcher to provide them with observation protocols. Nor did they require
special ethical clearance or the sign of formal contracts. In most cases, the approval to
observe and interview staff was obtained from the CEOs after an initial introductory meeting
where the researcher explained the research idea and aims to potential candidates. The only
exception was TSS where after the initial call with the CEO, the researcher had separate
meetings with the head of finance group and the Chair to explain the aims of the research.
The Chair requested a written report with the details of the data collection methods, their
purposes and format, and after it was submitted, approval was granted.
3.4.2.5 Research ethics
In all cases, participation was voluntary, and the participants provided their informed consent
before taking part in the study. The researcher in turn ensured anonymity and privacy of the
participants. With respect to the funders, similarly, no special clearance was required. The
funders, however, requested higher levels of data protection and anonymity, and therefore,
as much care as possible was taken to remove any identifying information. The information
89



sheet and consent form are available in Appendix 7. During participant observation, informed
consent was obtained verbally and facilitated by the CEOs who informed the staff of the
researcher’s visit.
The study complies with the ethical guidelines of the University of Edinburgh Business School,
and an ethics application Level 2 was obtained from the Ethics Committee. Although this
research was conducted in organisations working with young people, the researcher did not
have direct contact with young people. The few exceptions include the young people in dual
roles as both the service users and the employees (the young people are officially employed
by CYP) and a conversation with a group of senior high school pupils (over the age of 15) at
SL. In most cases, the data about user experiences was collected through testimonies of the
staff and the observation of service encounters.

3.5 Data Analysis
3.5.1 Thematic analysis
The present study used thematic analysis defined as “the process of identifying patterns or
themes within qualitative data” (Maguire and Delahunt, p. 217). Clark et al. (2021, p. 227)
suggest that thematic analysis is appropriate for research questions on “factors and social
processes that underpin a phenomenon,” and since the exploration of various elements that
underpin the legitimation process is the focus of the thesis, it was felt that thematic analysis
is an appropriate way to analyse the data. Rubin and Rubin (2012) suggest that unlike shorter
codes, themes are statements that identify what a unit of data means. Because during the
analysis the data is partitioned into many smaller parts, it was felt that such an approach
would better capture the meaning without losing links to the context.
Data analysis was supported by NVivo. The advantages of using computer-assisted qualitative
data analysis software (CAQDAS) include the ability to create, edit, and sort codes; perform
search and querying abilities; and use advanced data management tools such as visual
diagrams (Bazeley, 2020). However, NVivo is a tool to facilitate the analysis; it does not
substitute the reflective analysis per se (Bryman, 2016; Corbin and Strauss, 2015). As Saldaña,
(2016, p. 58) notes that codes “are nothing more than labels until they are analysed.” In this
study, the software was used to sort, arrange, and organise the large amounts of data
90



collected, i.e., facilitate the coding process. The analysis per se was undertaken using analytic
memos to make sense of the data, note any patterns and record the flow of ideas.
An analytic memo is defined as “a brief or extended narrative that documents the
researcher’s reflections and thinking processes about the data” (Miles et al., 2020, p.88).
Analytic memos do not have a pre-defined format and are used for multiple purposes: to
record ideas, summarize data, draw conclusions, display data, use in final reporting, and many
other. They can be short to capture thoughts or more elaborate in later stages of the research
process after multiple strands of the data have been analysed and looked across. Saldaña,
(2016, p.58) suggests that an analytic memo represents “the researchers’ reflexivity on the
data corpus.” In other words, it is a written reflection on the deeper and complex meanings
of the data. This study employed memos for a variety of purposes. Memos contained
reflections on the coding processes and code choices; how the thinking about legitimacy
progressed; and the emergent patterns, categories, themes, and concepts in the data. Some
examples of the memos are included in Appendix 8.

3.5.2 Phases of thematic analysis
Thematic analysis encompasses a range of different approaches (Braun et al., 2019).
Researchers have applied it both inductively in an interpretive, bottom-up reflexive analysis
(Braun and Clarke, 2019) and deductively with a priori codes and theoretical frameworks
(Boyatzis, 1998). Accordingly, there are several approaches to thematic analysis developed in
the wider literature (e.g., Alhojailan, 2012; Boyatzis,1998; Javadi and Zarea, 2016). Braun and
Clarke (2006), for example, developed a 6-step framework, which is suggested as the most
influential approach for carrying out thematic analysis in the social sciences (Maguire and
Delahunt, p. 217). This study followed the framework but also complemented it with two
other frameworks. The first was developed by Thompson (2022) and is specifically tailored to
studies based on abductive reasoning. The second was proposed by Auerbach and Silverstein
(2003). It was felt that Braun and Clarke’s model made a straight leap from coding to themes
without elaborating on how this is achieved while Auerbach and Silverstein’s model had a
clear intermediary step between codes and themes. Thus, the use of all three approaches
could produce a more nuanced thematic analysis. The steps in thematic analysis as prescribed

91



by all the three frameworks are presented in Table 3.8. The approach to thematic analysis
used in this study borrowed elements from each of these three frameworks.
Table 3.8 Phases of thematic analysis according to three analytical frameworks
Braun and Clarke (2006)
1. Familiarizing yourself
with your data
2. Generating initial codes
3. Searching for themes
4. Reviewing themes
5. Defining and naming
themes
6. Producing the report

Auerbach and Silverstein (2003)
1. Raw Text
2. Relevant Text
3. Repeating Ideas
4. Themes
5. Theoretical Constructs
6. Theoretical Narrative
7. Research Concerns

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Thompson (2022)
Transcription and
Familiarisation
Coding
Codebooks
Development of Themes
Theorising
Comparison of Datasets
Data Display
Writing Up

Step 1. Transcription and Familiarisation
In this step the author engaged with the transcription of the audio recording. This was done
in parallel with data collection because it simultaneously facilitated the development of a
theoretical framework or what Hulthén (2002) referred to as crossroads and allowed the
author to seek more clarification in the interviews that followed (Guest et al., 2012). For
example, as the author was transcribing the interviews with the staff, she made notes on the
margins and later wrote an analytic memo about the points that were puzzling or required
further data.
The data was organised into five sets. Separate datasets were created for each of the four
case study organisations and included interview transcripts, field notes, documents, and
other relevant materials (such as pictures of the physical premises the author made during
her visit). The fifth data set included data about the funders, e.g., interview transcripts,
funding applications forms and other relevant documents. Aggregating the data about
funders into a separate dataset was deemed appropriate considering that the second
research question concerned the funders. Analysing their viewpoints separately from the case
study organisations not only allows more meaningful comparisons of case study organisations
with their funders but also presents an opportunity to triangulate the data to increase the
validity of the present study (Denscombe, 2010), which will be discussed in greater details
later in the chapter. Thus, two coding schemes emerged with patterns and themes pertinent
to these two data sources. An example of the coding process is included in Table 3.9.
92



Step 2. Coding
A code is defined as “a word or short phrase that symbolically assigns a summative, salient,
essence-capturing, and/or evocative attribute for a portion of language-based or visual data”
(Saldaña, 2016, pp. 3-4). Coding allows to condense large amounts of data into a manageable
set of categories based on their related characteristics (Coffey and Atkinson, 1996). Miles et
al.’s (2020) manual for qualitative data analysis lists over 25 different coding methods.
However, they suggest that these coding techniques can be used together. The present study
used two of these techniques and the example of the coding process appears in Table 3.9:
•

Process coding, which uses gerunds (“-ing” words) to label observable or conceptual
actions in the data. This was the preferred method and was applied throughout the
coding process, e.g., “Protecting service user privacy” (Table 3.9). Process codes
connote action in the data (Charmaz, 2002) and thus it was felt they can better
communicate how the TSOs legitimise.

•

Descriptive coding uses labels that summarize a piece of information in a word or a
short phrase, e.g., “CEO’s focus on social enterprise activities.”

The use of these coding techniques ensures that a label for each code remained close to the
raw data to avoid too much of a conceptual leap (Boyatzis, 1998; Guest et al., 2012). Coding
may consist of several rounds and is a cyclical process. The very first round of coding
generated multiple detailed codes because at this stage “every single point of significance
should be included as a code” (Thompson, 2022, p. 1413) to develop a better understanding
of the corpus of data (Braun and Clarke, 2006). The second round of coding is geared towards
consolidating the codes under a single heading or removing them if deemed irrelevant and
thus it is a more selective process (Saldaña, 2016). For example, in the first round of coding
all instances in which participants mentioned their area were coded as “local awareness”,
“responding to local needs”, and “area characteristics.” But in the second round of coding,
they were replaced with a single “linking with the local area” because the participants
consistently used the words to imply their embeddedness in the local community. Prior to the
third round of coding, a codebook was developed.

93



Table 3.9 Example of the coding process

Quotation

Code

You have to look at what's coming down the line
as such. I mean clearly the green agenda - agree
or disagree with it - is coming down the line. So it
doesn't matter if it's a building built from
whatever. It doesn't matter if a member of the
royal family will come along and cut the line. It's
great. That’s what I’m going to use to get to that
end of the game because the end game isn't
about them or the environment. It’s about the
person that stays in those areas. (CEO, DST)

CEO’s focus on
social enterprise
activities

There's nothing that the school's able to do. So
by bringing them into these projects, they're
creating a support network. […] so that the
person's not feeling isolated. Or they know that if
there was anything that they needed help with,
[DST] is in the local community. They could use
the couches, they could sit and watch TV, they
could get a coffee, they could just use it as a
recreational space. Or if they really needed me,
they could come in and speak to me in the office
and say, “[name of the project worker], we're
really struggling with this.” (Operations
Manager/project worker, DST)

Being different
from the school

I think with the introduction of VR, that sets us
quite different to everyone else. […] it's what
youngsters are interested in. I think the funders
are quite interested in that. And it is the future
like VR and computer, gaming and especially in
Dundee, with all the investment going into the
computer side of things in Dundee. Abertay
University obviously is massive for computer and
cyber security and then we're getting new games
arena as well in Dundee so that's kind of feeding
into the future, hopefully of who will be working
there. … But it's just selling yourself really, telling
what you do. (Employment and Revenue Officer,
DST)
The top person is OSCR, because they dictate
charity law essentially and govern charity law.
You need to constantly look out for information
that comes out from them. We have accounts
audited on an annual basis. That means we
either get them audited, so it's full audit or
what's called an independent examination. Both
are still credible in the eyes of OSCR. (CEO, DST)

2-Step Theme Development
Theme
Theoretical
construct
1. The role of
Values and
the leader
beliefs

2. Engaging the
service user

Service context

Developing
distinctive local
services

5. Local milieu

Local community
institutions

Building on the
strengths of the
local area

8. Securing
funding

Civic/local
institutions

Complying with
rules and
regulations

9. Regulatory
approval

Civic institutions

Empowering
service users
Protecting
service user
privacy

94



Step 3. Codebook
Codebooks were introduced into this research to provide clarity and structure to the coding
process. The advantage of the codebook is that it produces an increased level of verifiability
(Guest et al., 2012). An excerpt from the codebook with an example of a code applied in the
study is shown in Figure 3.3. For each code, a definition is offered, highlighting the key
characteristics of the code. There is a “when to use” criteria and “when not to use” criteria to
present guidance if there is potential overlap between codes. Finally, an example quotation
is provided.
Code #9: Linking with the local area
Definition: Participants reflecting on how their legitimacy is linked with the local area
When to use: participants make comments about how their services/decisions are reflective of the unique
characteristics, needs and realities of the area they are embedded in
When not to use: if concerns wider needs that go beyond the needs of a particular area (i.e., if participants
imply society-at-large, Code #10 may be appropriate)
Example: “The catering kitchen idea came from the fact that the local high school have been running a cafe
up at the school […] we know that there's young people at the school who are interested in this sort of
thing, and I mean catering and hospitality is the sort of lifeblood of the [location] area if you like. If you're
staying locally and you're not going on to university, then it's one of the main areas for getting a job. That
sort of came together.” (Chair, ETR)

Figure 3.3 Code-book extract for the code: Linking the services with the needs of the area

Step 4. Development of themes
In thematic analysis codes are specific and concise, while themes are more complex and can
encompass multiple codes to theoretically explain phenomena (Guest et al., 2012; Saldaña,
2016). Braun and Clarke (2006, p. 84) distinguish between two levels of themes: semantic and
latent. Semantic themes “are identified within the explicit or surface meanings of the data
and the analyst is not looking for anything beyond what a participant has said or what has
been written”. In contrast, a latent theme “starts to identify or examine the underlying ideas,
assumptions, and conceptualisations - and ideologies - that are theorised as shaping or
informing the semantic content of the data.” In other words, semantic themes are
descriptions of the corpus of data while latent themes are a level higher and represent
interpretations of semantic themes. As Thompson (2022, p.1415) writes “latent themes
should always be the outcome as theorisation is central to abductive reasoning.” The goal of
abductive thematic analysis is then to progress from description to interpretation, where

95



there is an attempt to theorise the broader meanings and implications with respect to existing
theoretical frameworks.
To achieve this, the author went through two cycles of theme development. The first cycle
concerned the semantic themes, or the summarised content capturing surface level
information about what was explicitly said. In this step, the codes were analysed with the
view of establishing relationships and grouped according to one or two unifying features. For
example, it became clear that “Being different from the school”, “Empowering service users”,
“Protecting service user privacy”, and “Offering tangible benefits” all concerned satisfying the
needs of service users. This sorting of codes into groups that can effectively portray a
phenomenon can be labelled a theme (Braun and Clarke, 2006). Thus, they were brought
together under “Satisfying pragmatic needs of service user” (“Theme” column in Table 3.9).
Sometimes an individual code can be promoted to a theme if it is considered a central feature
of the data (Braun and Clarke, 2019). “Regulatory approval” was often based on a single code
of “Complying with rules and regulations”. The process of developing themes in Step 4 was
supported by the theoretical perspective adopted in the study, that is, certain terminology or
concepts used in the literature informed the development and labelling of themes. The
development of latent themes is discussed next.
Step 5. Theorising
Theorizing in abductive research should be guided, but not determined by existing theoretical
understanding (Atkinson et al., 2003; Kelle, 1997). It involves looking back at the extant
literature and seeing to what extent it can explain the relationship between the themes
(Timmermans and Tavory, 2012). At the same time the researcher should also examine
instances where the themes cannot be explained by existing frameworks (Alvesson and
Kärreman, 2007; Coffey and Atkinson, 1996; Tavory and Timmermans, 2014).
The themes that emerged in the coding process concerned a number of constituent groups,
with which TSOs sought to legitimise, and it became clear that legitimacy transcends the
funder-fundee relationships because there were clear links between the semantic themes,
for example, user engagement (“Engaging the service user”) depended on a service model
(“Organisational norms, rules and processes”) and yet user feedback and the service delivery
model were the key elements that helped the TSOs secure funding (“Seeking funding”).
96



Therefore, the starting point for theorisation was understanding which constituents granted
legitimacy and which institutions (norms, rules, beliefs, and cognitive schemes) were at play
when judgements about organisational legitimacy are made. The study relied on existing nonprofit literature on non-profit shareholders and the most common typologies of legitimacy
developed by Suchman’s (1995) and Scott’s (1995) to theorise legitimacy, and where
appropriate, express legitimation in terms of pragmatic, normative, regulative, and cognitive
institutions. This gave rise to theoretical constructs or what Auerbach and Silverstein (2003,
p.42) refer to as “the abstract grouping of themes” (“Theoretical construct” column in Table
3.9). Yet, the study also argued there was no unifying framework in the existing non-profit
theory and legitimacy theory to account for the constituents and institutions in a holistic way.
Thus, the study theorised a consolidation between existing conceptualisations of legitimacy
as a multiple stakeholder, multi-dimensional construct with Osborne’s Public Service
Ecosystem framework which provided the conceptual apparatus to explain the data without
needing to start from the ground-up in terms of theory development.
As Thompson (2022, p.1415) writes this is a crucial stage because it can suggest how “theory
can be refined, changed, adapted, or even consolidated with another conceptual idea so that
it can better account for the empirical data.” The concept of legitimacy was thus consolidated
with the PSE framework and adapted to fit the theoretical constructs. This adaptation as
Coffey and Atkinson (1996) suggest effectively represents the theoretical contribution of the
study.
Step 6. Comparison of Datasets
A case study is not simply a narrative description of an event, and it should be used with a
view to draw theoretical conclusions from it (Mitchell, 1983). Tsoukas (1989) argues that
empirically case studies help arrive at the contingent way in which a certain mix of
mechanisms has been formed and activated. He continues to argue that establishing
differences and similarities is important in the identification of causal mechanisms.
Similarities between the objects of analysis are explained by the generative mechanisms and
the similar type of contingencies that have led to the activation of these mechanisms.
Differences, on the other hand, may be due to different generative mechanisms or dissimilar
contingencies in which mechanisms have operated.

97



The study drew on the principles of comparative analysis (Hammersley et al., 2000) and used
the comparison of cases to stimulate theory development (Blaikie, 2010). As codes were
refined and preliminary theoretical constructs were generated for one case, these constructs
were then confronted with another case – which, in turn, suggested ways of amending and
improving the construct. This practice allows to assemble the cases into a stronger theoretical
edifice (Eckstein, 1975). This exercise produced detailed codebook with code descriptions,
theoretical constructs, and the final themes.
In comparative thematic analysis, the researcher looks at how themes are similar, how they
are different, and what kind of relationships may exist between them (Gibson and Brown,
2009). Thus, the first step concerned establishing commonalities and involved pooling
together all the material across the datasets that have something in common. The common
feature of all the cases is that the data was aggregated according to same constituent groups.
These groups, however, were then analysed further, noting any qualitative differences in how
they expressed themselves in a particular case.
In the second step, the study compared the datasets in terms of themes to establish whether
some themes were present in one dataset but not in another (Guest et al., 2012) and whether
themes had different expressions between organisations. Firstly, at this stage it was noted
that some codes were expressed more often in a particular case. For example, the staff and
the funders of DST tended to mention the CEO more often in relation to the organisation.
Having noted this pattern, secondly, time was taken to examine how the role of the CEO was
expressed in DST and how it compares with other cases. This was done by re-reading the
coded texts associated with the leaders of these organisations.
The last step in thematic analysis concerns examining relationships, i.e., the researcher should
analyse how different elements of their analysis fit together and contribute to an
understanding of a phenomenon (Guest et al., 2012). It is a crucial step because the constant
comparative method can produce a set of themes, but “on its own it does nothing to show
the relationships among those themes” (Thomas, 2016, p.228). The analysis was extensively
supported by analytic memos and visual thematic mapping, which is a recommended
technique for organising and exploring evolving themes, subthemes, and thematic
relationships (Braun and Clarke, 2006). The author went through several rounds of mapping

98



the relationships before the final diagrams presented in the Discussion chapter emerged, and
the commentary and discussion of how the themes interrelate will accompany the diagrams.

3.6 Issues of Generalisability, Validity and Reliability
The questions about generalisability, validity, and reliability of a case study have been a
source of debates in the literature (Clark et al, 2021). The ability to collect rich amounts of
data about each case often comes at the cost of reducing the number of cases for the study
(Hammersley et al., 2000). Accordingly, one of the major criticisms of the case study approach
is that findings from it cannot be generalised, therefore, their so-called external validity tends
to be low (Creswell, 2014). Unlike quantitative research which uses clear procedures of
validating data, the criteria are less clear with qualitative research. Some authors, however,
reject an understanding of generalisability in qualitative research in its classical sense, i.e., the
likelihood that their findings will extend beyond situations studied (Guba and Lincoln, 1981;
Schofield, 2000; Thomas, 2016). Instead, they offer an adaptation suitable for qualitative work
and suggest that an emphasis in any case study research should be made on analysing the
degree to which a context studied in one situation matches the context in other situations.
These “thick” descriptions about the phenomenon studied and their settings can facilitate an
informed judgement about how useful the findings of a particular study are in understanding
other sites (Goetz and LeCompte, 1984).
In qualitative research validity concerns the accuracy of the findings while reliability denotes
that the selected research approach is consistent over time and across different researchers
(Creswell, 2014, Denzin, 1989). Most qualitative studies, however, imply that the researcher
will be engaged with the participants in their social setting, and the researcher’s prior
knowledge and values inevitably affects the nature of the observations and interpretations
made (Gummesson, 2017). Accordingly, qualitative researchers have developed alternative
ways to judge the validity and reliability of qualitative studies. Lincoln and Guba (1985)
propose two criteria to assess quality and rigor of qualitative research - trustworthiness and
authenticity. Trustworthiness in turn is made up of four dimensions: credibility,
transferability, dependability, and confirmability. These criteria have been widely adopted in
case study research (Schofield, 2000; Thomas, 2016). Authenticity according to Bryman (2016)
implies the broader political impact of research and has a greater affiliation with action
research. Therefore, it was excluded from further consideration.
99



In line with the critical realist perspective, the author’s view is that qualitative research takes
place in real social settings and can have implications for people’s lives; that there exists a
reasonable explanation of a particular social situation or phenomenon; that the researcher
takes a position that affects the nature of the observations and the interpretations made; and
therefore, the outcomes of his or her research are not unjudgeable. Certain steps can be
taken to improve credibility, academic rigor, and integrity of research. These are presented in
Table 3.10 and discussed in turn.

3.6.1 Credibility
Credibility asks fundamental questions about truth value (Creswell, 2014; Thomas, 2016). It
requires that the qualitative researcher ensures the accurate portrayal and understanding of
the social world under investigation. It concerns a practice whereby the researcher explores
the phenomena from different angles. In this study the author sought to ensure credibility
with triangulation and respondent validation (Table 3.10).
Table 3.10 Measures of validity and reliability in the case study research
Dimension
Based on Lincoln and Guba (1985) and Miles et
al. (2020)
Credibility
Do the findings of the study make sense? Are they
credible to the people we study and to our
readers?

Implementation

•
•

•
•

Transferability
Are the conclusions of a case study transferable to
other contexts? Do they fit?

•
•

Dependability
Have things been done with reasonable care?

•
•
•

•
•

Confirmability
Is the researcher aware and explicit about the
inevitable biases that exist?

100

Triangulation: methodological, data and
theoretical
Respondent validation: feedback to
participants
Thick descriptions
Detailed characteristics of the sample, memos
and codebooks
Multiple case study design
Records of interviews and full transcripts of
interviews
Detailed observations notes
Analytic memos
Data collection protocols: interview guides,
ethics form, participant information sheet,
etc.
Overt observation and informed consent
Sense checks with the participants



Triangulation refers to “using more than one method or source of data in the study of social
phenomena” (Bryman, 2016, p.386). Denzin (1989), however, used the term more broadly to
refer to an approach that involves “multiple observers, methods, interpretive points of views,
and levels and forms of empirical materials in the construction of interpretations” (Denzin,
1989, p. 270). Accordingly four types of triangulation were proposed: (1) data triangulation
(the use of a variety of data sources, including time, space and persons, in a study); (2)
methodological or method triangulation (the use of multiple methods to study a situation or
phenomenon; (3) theory triangulation (the use of multiple theories or hypotheses when
examining a situation); and (4) investigator triangulation (the use of more than one
investigator). Based on this classification, it can be suggested that the study employed a
combination of the first three types: the study collected responses from multiple groups of
respondents (i.e., CEOs, trustees, project staff, funders, and where relevant service users);
the study complemented interview data with observational data and document analysis; and
the study considered the application of several theories from strategic management, public
management and non-profit studies. The latter point is linked with the abductive reasoning
process which underpinned the study, and which was discussed in section 3.2.2. This type of
triangulation was accorded through the practice of theory matching and systematic
combining that informed and re-shaped the analysis of data (Dubois and Gadde, 2002).
Triangulation supports corroboration of results and increases the credibility and validity of
their results (Miles et al., 2020). However, the point of triangulation is not just in seeking to
confirm the results, it allowed the author to explore different possible explanations of a
phenomena, to discard or otherwise find further confirmation to initial ideas and uncover
new ideas throughout the data collection and analysis stages. Triangulation helps obtain more
comprehensive data whilst strengthening the overall research design as one weakness from
a certain method is compensated against the strength of another. In fact, it is for this reason
that Creswell and Miller (2000) argue that validity can be a strength of qualitative research
because examining evidence from different data sources helps triangulate the results and
ensure that they are cross-checked against other evidence.
Moreover, the author sought to ensure the credibility of the study by applying the respondent
validation technique. Respondent validation, or member validation, is a process whereby a
researcher provides research participants with an account of the study’s findings (Bryman,
101



2016). The purpose of respondent validation is to seek corroboration of the account that the
researcher has formed. Respondent validation in this research involved discussing the
research findings with participants of the study to seek confirmation that the author has
correctly interpreted their accounts. First, respondent validation was carried out during the
interviews whereby the author sought clarification from the respondent. At different points
in the interview the author attempted to provide each research participant with an account
of what they have said asking them to confirm. Further, the author made extensive notes
during the interviews and observations (and also in analytic memos) and put questions marks
where further information was needed and because the interviews with some of the
members were repeated, the researcher could raise these questions and obtain more
information. At the end of the site visits, the author also shared some of her observations
made by watching the staff at work which further provided clarity to the conclusions made.

3.6.2 Transferability
There are considerable debates around the generalisability of case study findings in the
literature (Dubois and Gadde, 2002; Thomas, 2016). Transferability concerns the import of
the findings of the study to other contexts, that is whether they can be generalised to other
social settings and to what extent.
To ensure transferability, the findings include enough “thick description” (Miles et al., 2020)
for readers to assess the potential transferability and appropriateness for their own settings.
The author provided extensive characteristics of the sample and sufficiently described them
to permit adequate comparisons with other samples. The report clearly outlines the limits on
sample selection and critically examines how it compares with the wider third sector and
where it fits. The sampling is theoretically diverse enough to encourage broader applicability
where relevant.
The author generated detailed codebooks of the data analysed. This was supported by
continuous memo writing. These memos contained descriptions, summaries, ideas,
observations made along with the reflections on the researcher’s rationale followed in the
process. The memos contained visual data as well such as code maps, mind maps, and other
graphical aids that the author developed to support the analysis. Examples of these memos
are included in Appendix 8.
102



The inclusion of several cases could potentially improve theory building and extend the results
of the analysis beyond one particular setting (Eisenhardt, 1989; Yin, 2003). However, in terms
of transferability, it must be noted that the study does not make claims to be applicable to all
TSOs that provide children’s services and/or are of particular size. Theory building requires
that data be available from a substantial number of cases (Hammersley et al., 2000).
Therefore, sufficiency of explanation is only tested in a limited way. Future research should
expand their analysis both spatially and temporally to allow for more possibilities of control.

3.6.3 Dependability
Dependability requires that the researcher maintains protocols to detail how the procedures
were followed (Bryman, 2016). It addresses a fundamental question of quality and integrity
of whether the research process is consistent over time and across researchers and methods.
The author has maintained the records of the research process in various forms and formats
including fieldwork notes, characteristics of the sample, interview transcripts, memos, coding
schemes and other relevant materials. All the basic paradigms and analytic constructs were
clearly outlined.

3.6.4 Confirmability
Confirmability addresses researchers’ biases and it shows that the qualitative researchers are
aware of the influence of personal values on the research and have taken reasonable steps
to minimize their influence (Clark et al., 2021). The author has admitted previously that her
values and experience are part of the research process, and it is expected that she will not be
separated from the research. In saying that, the author, however, has ensured that values
have not biased the research and sought to ensure the processes of research were
transparent and clear and provided as many examples as possible of how the findings
emerged. The researcher also sense checked her observations with the participants at various
points in the research.
All respondents were aware of the purposes of the study and participated voluntarily in the
study. Their privacy was safeguarded through the anonymisation of data and non-disclosure
of their individual responses to third parties.

103



Chapter summary
This chapter has presented the methodological underpinnings of the study. It commenced
with providing the background to the study because a large part of the research was
undertaken during the Covid-19 pandemic, and it significantly restricted access to research
sites and significantly influenced the methodological choices made. The chapter then
proceeded to outlining the features of critical realism, the author’s philosophical position, and
its implications for the research design. The critical realist lens encouraged the author to
recognise the presence of hidden mechanisms that cannot be observed directly in the actual
domain but using constant and iterative process of moving between empirical data and
theory, a plausible explanation of the phenomena can be found. The study then aimed to
explore how legitimacy is idiosyncratically understood by various constituents and what
processes underpin legitimation.
These aims were addressed by following the principles of abductive reasoning. In this iterative
process, the author sought to find the best possible explanation of legitimacy, combining
previous theoretical developments with the emerging empirical data. Thus, the process
involved simultaneous data collection and interpretation of the emerging findings.
A multiple case study research design was adopted for the empirical component of this
research. Four case study organisations were selected to gain an insight into the elements
that contribute to their organisational legitimacy. To collect the necessary data, the study
used a combination of qualitative research methods, which included interviews, observations,
and document analysis. The interviews were conducted with the organisational leader and
members of the management team, board members, project staff, young people, and the
funding bodies. Service encounters were also observed, and staff interactions were recoded
while internal documents allowed constructing the key events in the organisational history.
The use of multiple data collection methods allowed the researcher to gain a better
understanding of the processes underpinning organisational legitimacy while at the same
time facilitated the triangulation of data. Triangulation, respondent validation, codebook,
detailed records of procedures and protocols were used at different stages of the research to
ensure the study’s validity and reliability.

104



CHAPTER 4: FINDINGS PART I. LEGITIMACY FROM THE PERSPECTIVE
OF CASE STUDY ORGANISATIONS

Chapter overview
Chapters 4 and 5 present the findings of the empirical study with the purpose of addressing
the research questions. Chapter 4 concerns the case study organisations and chapter 5
explores their funders. The rationale for separating the findings into two chapters is to ensure
that each case study is explored in enough detail, while also allowing for cross-examination
of any differences that may exist between the organisations and their funders.
This chapter presents the findings of this study and outlines the key processes underpinning
organisational legitimacy. The chapter is organised into four sections, one for each case study.
The case study organisations represent the Scottish registered charities that work with young
people. The report of findings for each case study commences with an overview of the
charities. It provides a short historical account of each and outlines some key events in its
organisational history. It then outlines how the organisations seek to legitimise within their
environments and uncovers the processes that support their legitimacy. The funders’
definitions and perceptions of the legitimacy of the case study organisations are presented in
the next chapter. All the names have been anonymised.

105



4.1 Case study 1. Transitions Support Service
4.1.1 Background
Transitions Support Service (TSS) is a charity based in Musselburgh and operating across East
Lothian and Midlothian. It was established in 1985 by an investment charity trust (ICT) with a
capital of £4m, and until 31 March 2006 it was the delivery arm of ICT providing services to
young homeless people in central Edinburgh (Figure 4.1).
East Lothian has a population of 103,050 and is estimated to have a higher proportion of
younger people (aged 0-15) than the average for Scotland as a whole (National Records of
Scotland, 2022a). According to their constitution, TSS’ purpose is to “inspire young people to
build a confident future, enabling them to reach their potential as individuals and participate
fully in the life of their communities”. They offer young people support in re-engaging with
the school, finding a job or an apprenticeship, or getting the help they need. As of 2022, they
have 20 staff and four teams, three of which are practice teams delivering 12 services:
•

Independent Living Team (3 staff) helps young people develop the skills they need to
live an independent life.

•

Mental Health and Wellbeing team (1 staff) helps young people improve their
wellbeing and overcome personal challenges.

•

Education and Employability team (8 staff) helps young people improve their
educational attainment and get jobs, work experience and apprenticeships.

•

Management and Admin team (4 staff) supports the practice teams.

TSS has the largest board of the four case study organisations comprised of nine trustees who
are all working professionals from the banking, legal, educational, financial, public service and
communication and media sectors. They occupy managerial posts and work for some highprofile organisations such as BBC Scotland, Bank of England, and Edinburgh Napier University.
Two of the nine trustees at TSS are nominated by ICT to “provide an oversight of the funding
provided by ICT” (Trustee1). The Chair of ICT is one of these two trustees.

106





In 2020 TSS’ income of 696,916 was made up of 443,432 (65%) of grants and 245,652 (34%)
of the annual donation from ICT. Compared to the other three charities, TSS has a higher
proportion of income from the local authority than from the charitable funders (65% and 35%,
respectively).
Table 4.1 outlines the key processes that TSS engages in to enact their legitimacy. These are
divided into six groups and each group includes several approaches that TSS uses to gain
approval, obtain an endorsement, or secure support of their environment. The sections that
follow present further details and describe who TSS seeks to legitimise with and how.

4.1.2 Focus on diversified funding
In 2018 a new CEO assumed her responsibilities. She was promoted from her role as the
manager, and she has been with TSS since 2011. Her previous work experience includes work
in the public sector and involvement in the public service delivery under which she set up
projects for young offenders, programs for people recovering from substance misuse and
youth employability schemes. In her interview, the CEO has expressed her preference for
public sources of funding and suggested that “in an ideal world most of our [TSS] funding
would come from the local authorities”. She believes that the main role of the CEO is to
engage in networking and building relationships with the funders and other key organisations.
In 2020 she persuaded the Board to employ a fundraiser because according to her, it is a more
effective way of running the organisation allowing her to focus more on strategic activities:
The [former] chief executive laterally was sitting at his desk all day every day doing
funding bids. That's not what chief executive should be doing. He should be out there.
He should have that vision; he should be liaising with all these different stakeholders.
(CEO)
The fundraiser was needed to “protect TSS in what is a very volatile market” (Trustee1), and
the vision for the fundraiser is to build relationships with new funders and target “bigger
brands” (Staff1). The staff do note the changes in their funding base as the proportion of
funding from charitable funders grew to 43% in 2022.

108



Table 4.1 TSS – processes supporting organisational legitimacy
How Seeks to Legitimise
Focus on diversified funding
Linking with the local area
1. Finding gaps in local
provision
2. Developing distinctive local
services

Developing robust structures
and procedures
1. Focus on professionalism
2. Formalised structures and
procedures
3. Complying with laws and
rules

Engaging the young people
1. Tailored programs and
services
2. Seeking service user input
3. Addressing stigma

Illustrative Quotes
You have to be doing everything you can to make the charity
sustainable. You need to broaden the funding routes. (Trustee1)
If it [TSS] was not to offer support it would be a humongous gap. (Staff6)
There is nothing in East Lothian at the moment for construction at all.
(Staff1)
All the funding at the moment is about the result of the pandemic and
where the gaps are in terms of what young people are missing out on.
(CEO, Board meeting)
It's one of the few charities that does go about these things in a very
professional way and has blatantly brought in somebody with an
expertise in finding funds to deliver services. (Trustee1)
The employability skills assessment and the indications of vulnerability
are done by every member of staff. (Staff2)
We have to be compliant. The governing bodies of charities, that keeps
them happy. (Staff8)
There's not like you come to [TSS], there's one route you can go down. It
really depends on their interests, their barriers, where they are in life
and what support they need. (Staff2)
The support is very much a collaboration with a young person. (Staff5)
When I recruited peer support workers to support their own peers that
had an incredible impact on the people they worked with. (Staff10)

Managing relationships
1. Relational and reputational
focus
2. Raising public profile
3. Maintaining relationships
with the parent charity
4. Building and maintaining
relationships with others

He [Fundraiser] is doing a lot of articles, we're getting published in the
local newspapers, which is what you want. (Staff9)
We very much give them [referrers] a lot of information about what
we're actually doing and how we're supporting. (Staff10)
There's talk about extending out beyond Lothian. I think we need to be
careful about that given how important ICT funding is to us. (T4, Board
meeting)
In terms of making strategic decisions and influencing people I've joined
the Third Sector Forum. (CEO)

Securing funding
1. Maintaining relationships
with the funder
2. Researching the funder
3. Evidencing

You have to maintain not just a decent relationship but a good
relationship with your funding body, and you've got to fulfil their needs
by submitting reports, etc. (T2)
When you're making your funding bid to one particular funding body,
you will frame it in the language that they demand. (Trustee1)
A pilot is going to be attractive to funders because all the funding at the
moment is about the result of the pandemic and where the gaps are for
young people. (CEO, Board meeting)

109



The CEO’s focus, in turn, is on strengthening their relationships with the local authority with
the goal of converting their current grants from the local authority into service level
agreements, which she managed to do for their grant from the housing support service in
2021 because of “the relationship with the manager of where that funding comes from”
(CEO).
On the back of the growing demand for their employability support service in 2021, the CEO
developed a pilot project offering an employability course to their partners for a fee. They did
not label it as social enterprise, but the purpose of the project is to generate income to
support their future sustainability. At the Board meeting, her idea received the support of the
trustees, but they noted that it should not distract from the core charitable purpose and “be
carefully managed” (Trustee2).

4.1.3 Linking with the local area
Finding gaps in local provision
TSS’ strategic goal is to “continuously identify needs and gaps in provision, adapting services
accordingly” (TSS Strategic Plan 2020-25). This as they suggest ensures their relevance to the
community. For example, their employability project grew in response to such changes in the
needs of the local community where more tutoring services in East Lothian were made
available to young people because of the pandemic:
In all honesty the tutor post is quite out of date. The way that I'm seeing it is where the
gaps are. You're looking at the requests that we're getting. The “Build you up” course,
which is your construction and employability course, we're just inundated. (CEO)
Moreover, they suggested that their employability program would be attractive for a funder
because it is “meeting the changing needs of young people during these [pandemic] times”
(Trustee3, Finance board meeting).
Developing distinctive local services
In 2011 TSS withdrew from Edinburgh and relocated to East Lothian to avoid competition
from large charities that were stepping into the areas it had been successful in. The staff
suggest that there is less extensive provision of services in East Lothian compared to other
areas, which makes their services highly valued:
110



I think because East Lothian's relatively underserved, the schools and young people and
their families really hold TSS in high regard because there isn't a lot there. (Staff6)
For this reason, they are wary of expanding into areas where there are already enough
organisations because “then there is dodgy territory” (CEO). When developing new services,
they build on their core strengths and staff expertise, but in doing so they seek to maintain
distinctiveness from other services and/or organisations to strengthen their position as
unique providers of services in their local community.
TSS believes that the relationship with the local authority has been very good because they
value TSS’ contribution to the education of young people in the area and continue to fund TSS
“because of the unique services that are being delivered by the charity” (Trustee1).

4.1.4 Developing robust internal procedures
Focus on professionalism
The funding from ICT is unrestricted, and it enables TSS to “be innovative with funding
packages for projects and developments” (TSS Annual Report 2022) but is effectively spent
on the central support, i.e., the salaries of the CEO, and the finance and administration team
because they are an “essential part of any effective organisation” (Trustee1) who can ensure
that the charity is run professionally. Over the two years of engaging with them, the
researcher observed their roles develop into something even more specific and clearly
delineated. For example, in 2022, their Fundraiser became Fundraising and Communications
Manager, their former Service Coordinator moved to join the management team as Practice
Manager with more supervisory functions while the Education and Employability team was
brought together and given supervision by a former project worker (TSS website). These
greater role divisions are a way for TSS to highlight their professionalism.
Formalised structures and procedures
TSS tends to have more detailed procedures. While the other three case study organisations
only publish annual financial statements, TSS publishes financial statements, annual reports,
and stakeholder feedback reports. The reports tend to be very detailed and supported by
stats and graphical data, quotes, and pictures. For example, 20 pages of their 47-page Trustee
Annual Report 2019 include detailed information about their performance compared to an
111



average of 2-3 pages in similar reports of the other three organisations, which is another way
for them to emphasize their professionalism.
TSS has formalized data collection and reporting procedures. All the staff follow a standard
procedure of capturing service-related data such as progress and outcomes achieved. This
information is supplied by the project workers at four-month intervals. It is stored in the
central database containing the stakeholder questionnaires, statistics, and three different
assessments of well-being used by the fundraiser to highlight their work to funders and other
external audiences. The staff is asked to write up case-studies so that they “have got some
nice qualitative as well as quantitative data” (Staff3), and “do two social media posts a month”
(Staff4).
TSS has also institutionalised the participation of the service user in the design and delivery
of services in its Young Ambassadors program. The program involves three former service
users who “develop peer youth-led projects” (TSS website).
Complying with laws and rules
At TSS the finance manager is responsible for updating the polices and ensuring their
compliance with the requirements of OSCR and Companies House because running the
charity according to the expectations set by the regulators guarantees public confidence in
them:
If we keep to the rules as much as we can, then we will be comfortable, and we will
survive providing we get the grants. It's about running the charity properly. (Staff8)
At the Board meeting policy updates were part of the agenda, and the Chair highlighted how
important these are in running the charity in times of uncertainty:
I feel it gives us a sense of confidence that we know that there's a policy for almost
everything. Last year we had to fall back quite heavily on our policies on grievance and
discipline. It was fantastic that they were there. (Trustee5, Board meeting)
TSS is also attentive to their reserves policy making sure their reserves do not exceed a certain
level because according to the staff the charities are expected to spend all their income on
charitable activities. At the Board meeting they set it at the level of three months of running
costs which is what is “recommended by auditors” (Trustee3, Board meeting) and

112



implemented across other charities because it is generally “attractive to funders” (Trustee4,
Board meeting).

4.1.5 Engaging the young people
Tailored programs and services
The staff suggest that a distinguishing characteristic of their services is their one-to-one work
with young people. Unlike other charities they do not have time bounded services because
“projects that do that do not achieve good results” (Staff8). Accordingly, each package is
tailored towards the needs of individual young people. TSS offers a range of complementary
services, and the staff often refer the young people internally for more specific support. They
believe that these features of their service delivery model have earned them their good
reputation, which, for example, the Chair of ICT uses to justify ICT’s funding to the board:
It's one-to-one counselling care, developing education packages, employment packages,
etc. for an individual. We've been really proud about being able to keep it going. That's
why I'm very satisfied that the arrangement with ICT is one that I can justify to anyone.
(Trustee1)
Seeking service user input
The young people at TSS are involved in developing the package of support for them alongside
other agencies (e.g., Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services [CAMHS], social work, etc.).
They are then regularly asked to provide feedback to the project worker during service
delivery. TSS also runs focus groups with the young people and involves them in the staff
recruitment process. To engage them further, TSS offers opportunities to earn accredited
certificates that support employment (e.g., construction qualifications).
Addressing stigma
From conversations with the staff, however, engaging the young people is not always
straightforward because some of them feel vulnerable, and are not willing to open. Yet, there
seems to be stigma associated with TSS that some young people are wary of:
So many more people know about TSS, but unfortunately, we’re not in the young people
rails so to speak. There is a stigma about TSS project. I think that's quite a big thing that
we need to try and get over. (Staff9)
113



To promote the benefits of engaging with TSS, TSS relies on support of other groups. Staff1,
for example, leverages her contacts with the constructions industry who “reiterate that
positive message that the industry needs you”. In 2021 TSS developed the Young
Ambassadors program involving the former service users to help promote a positive image of
TSS among the young people. TSS also considers releasing some of their decision-making
powers to the young people. For example, during the board meeting the CEO shared an
update that the staff were in discussions to let the young people who are apprehensive of
coming to TSS to choose how to engage, for example, online or via other locations (e.g., local
community centre), which they found to be effective during the pandemic.

4.1.6 Managing relationships
Relational and reputational focus
TSS’ staff define their legitimacy in terms of offering the right support to the young people.
Their services have a waiting list which “speaks to the good reputation of [TSS]” (Staff10).
They refer to their good track record of the young people who are “doing really really well”
(Staff2) and emphasize their strong reputation among professionals, young people, and
partners and the high demand for their services:
Schools value us very highly. So do social work, CAMHS. They know we have a good
success rate with young people who have mental health problems and learning
difficulties and autism. (Staff5)
Raising public profile
Raising their public profile is part of TSS’ strategic plan that the CEO presented at the Board
meeting. It is “important in terms of the credibility” (CEO) and is necessary to maintain
“because people forget about you” (Staff8). At the board meeting the CEO reported that all
the staff created a LinkedIn page, they published articles in local newspapers, applied for
awards and attended strategic meetings with a local MP. As part of this objective, the
fundraiser regularly publishes case-studies on their social media “to highlight any successes”
(Staff8).
Maintaining relationships with the parent charity
Since its inception, TSS has maintained the core relationship with ICT. The two ICT’s directors
114



on the TSS’ Board serve to provide an oversight of ICT’s funds. The Chair of ICT is
simultaneously a TSS’ trustee. He is the core link between the two charities who maintains
the relationship. TSS’ ongoing concern is that the relationship “has to do with the
personalities that have been involved over those years” (Trustee1).
Accordingly, much of the discussion during the board meeting was about maintaining the link
with ICT. TSS decided to propose a counteroffer and nominate a TSS’ trustee to join the Board
of ICT to “have somebody inside ICT who can continue this relationship” (Trustee1). The
trustees enquired about the extent to which TSS is aligned with the parent charity. The Board
urged the CEO "to factor in the centrality of the ICT funding into the management of TSS”
(Trustee3, Board meeting) because they must “make sure that that is still relevant” (Trustee4,
Board meeting). For example, the Board inquired about the proportion of the housing support
services, which is the focus of ICT, and were apprehensive of extending out beyond Lothian
where ICT is based.
Building and maintaining relationships with others
Schools, social care, and mental health services are the most common referrers of the young
people to TSS and are thus part of the referral network. The relationship is critical for TSS to
maintain to ensure the young people are being continuously referred:
We can't deliver if we don't have the young people. If we have the schools on board, we
will have the young people. (Staff8)
TSS stays in close contact with referral agencies. For example, the program coordinator
attends three different meetings at the school to update them on the progress with the young
people. The referral networks in turn help with funding. The staff believe that their reputation
and the feedback from the community, i.e., the education sector, the council, social workers,
CAMHS, mental health services, etc. plays a key role in securing funding:
Their acknowledgement plays a massive part in highlighting that what we do is really
helping people. I’d say that the biggest thing that gets us funding is recognition from
other professionals and from people that we support. (Staff2)
The CEO, in turn, places a high emphasis on developing strategic networks to be “seen, heard
and make strategic decisions” (TSS Strategic Plan 2020-25) and to aid with funding. They are
part of a network of umbrella organisations, for example, the Third Sector Forum where they
115



focus on developing links with other TSOs to form consortiums, submit joint bids, and
influence the key people within the local authority. She regularly attends meetings with the
representatives from the council’s education, health, and social work services. Being part of
this network “does make a difference in terms of local authority funding” (CEO). The list of
organisations with whom TSS has cooperated is provided in Appendix 9.

4.1.7 Securing funding
Maintaining relationships with the funder
TSS have a strong relational focus, which is also reflected in how they approach funding.
Funding “really is about relationships that you have got with people” (CEO), and therefore,
they must “manage those relationships as best as they can to ensure that any refunding
potential is maximised” (Trustee1). For TSS an important part of this relationship building is
to maintain high standards of accountability to them:
…definitely make sure to write really good reports to them and always deliver
information on time and update them if something is changing. (Fundraiser)
Researching the funder
The CEO suggests that their reputation is based on what they are good at and therefore they
must maintain their focus on these core strengths and avoid changing their ethos to fit the
funding. Rather than “chasing the funding” (CEO), TSS is looking for the “closest fit”
(Fundraiser) with the funder. They research the funder’s profile and their interests, where
they are located and how much funding is distributed in Scotland. The fundraiser prefers the
funders who cover a smaller geographic area because there is less competition for funding.
TSS’ services are flexible, and they can re-package and present them “in the language that the
funders demand for funding bids” (Trustee1). There is some “tweaking” (Fundraiser) of
services in describing the same project to different funders, which they believe is necessary
to improve funding prospects.
Evidencing
In their applications, they must be able to evidence a need, and piloting is one way to evidence
success. Yet, they tend to emphasize that they have long waiting lists which they can refer to
in funding applications to “prove that we're really very much needed.” (Fundraiser). However,
116



as mentioned previously, the core element in their funding applications is the feedback from
the young people and other stakeholders. This helps them evidence the value of their services
to the community because “hearing direct from young people and their parents is as powerful
an endorsement as we can get” (Staff6). Yet, an input from the young people in their funding
applications emphasizes that they are user-led:
The main reason for having the Young Ambassador program is that more and more
these days what the funders are looking for the idea it's young person led. It's not coming
from us. (CEO, Board meeting)

117



4.2 Case study 2. Dance Sport and Tech
4.2.1 Background
Dance Sport and Tech (DST) was set up in 2003 in Dundee (Figure 4.2). DST’s aim is to make
dance, technology, and sport accessible for the educationally, socially, and rurally
disadvantaged children, young people, and adults.
Dundee is the fourth largest city of Scotland with a population of around 150,000 people
(National Records of Scotland, 2022a). In 2014, the United Nations recognised Dundee as the
UK's first UNESCO City of Design for its contributions to video games, medical research, and
comics (BBC, 2014). Dundee is home to a thriving games sector. The world’s fastest selling
game, Grand Theft Auto, was developed in Dundee (Tech Nation, 2017), and many game and
app developers including Denki, Outplay Entertainment, Waracle and MTC Media have offices
in the city. The game industry is supported by the Abertay University best known for computer
games. It was the first university in the world to launch a computer games degree. It has since
become the UK’s first ever Centre for Excellence in Computer Games Education and is ranked
as Europe’s leading games school by the Princeton Review (The Princeton Review, 2023). The
two professional football clubs, Dundee F.C. and Dundee United F.C. are also based in
Dundee.
DST has five permanent staff including the CEO and 16 freelance instructors. DST has the
smallest Board among the case study organisations with only four trustees, however the CEO
is also the founder and the Chair of the Board. The board represents a diverse skill set and
includes a professor from Abertay University, a financial adviser, and a self-employed
therapist.
Prior to setting up DST, in his former role the CEO was involved in the delivery of community
safety projects for young people in collaboration with public sector organisations and funded
through European and Scottish Government schemes. He is a proponent of the SE model in
the third sector, and outside of DST, holds a consultancy role advising charities on the matters
related to setting up and managing SEs. He is also a Board member of the local Social
Enterprise Network.

118





needed a firm base to grow their income and in 2015 they consolidated their activities in a
new facility in Dundee and opened an arts and sports centre offering dance studios, indoor
football pitches and a roller hockey rink. In 2016 their Dundee facility became a Scottish
Qualifications Authority5 (SQA) approved training centre which allowed it to deliver
accredited qualifications in dance and football, and in 2017 DST secured contracts within the
Pupil Equity Fund with primary schools in Angus to deliver sport, dance, and tech classes and
qualifications to children who stay in areas of high deprivation. They continued to expand
their activities and in 2018, they opened a new Virtual Reality (VR) centre in the building and
developed training programs based on VR gaming in close partnership with Abertay
University. They called 2020 “a pivotal year for DST” because of their three-million-pound
project backed up by a member of the Royal Family to build the UK’s first community facility
entirely from recycled building materials.
In 2020 in partnership with Princes Trust and Abertay University they ran a pilot of a preemployability program. This program is structured around tech and sports and offers twoweek courses for young people who have left school but are not job ready. The first courses
were held in the autumn 2021. The program is referral based and funded through the Young
Person Guarantee6 scheme. The CEO explains that the current level of the unrestricted
income that their SE generates does not allow them to apply for grants, and therefore, they
have opted for seeking contractual agreements instead:
[…] just now because we've got so much money in the bank, we can't apply for funding
because a funder will just say, “You have got that.” […] we can go out and do
employability stuff instead. That doesn't matter how much money you've got because
it's a contractual agreement. (CEO)
Table 4.2 outlines the key processes that DST engages in to enact their legitimacy. These are
divided into seven groups and each group includes several approaches that DST uses to gain
approval, obtain an endorsement, or secure support of their environment. The sections that
follow present further details and describe who DST seeks to legitimise with and how.

5

The Scottish Qualifications Authority (SQA) is the executive non-departmental public body of the Scottish
Government responsible for accrediting educational awards (SQA, 2022)
6
The Young Person’s Guarantee is funded through Scottish Government to provide flexible, person-centred
employability support and training to young people aged 16 to 24 (Scottish Government, 2020)

120



Table 4.2 DST – processes supporting organisational legitimacy
How Seeks to Legitimise
Managing the duality of
goals
1. CEO’s focus on
social enterprise
activities
2. Meeting customer
needs
3. Keeping the
charitable mission
in focus
Linking with the local
area
1. Building on the
strengths of the
local area
2. Developing
distinctive local
services
Linking with societal
developments

Illustrative Quotes
The way that this building works is we've always got money and if we want to go
and do something that doesn't involve funding, you think “You know what, we
just want to go and do that.” That's the difference. It gives you control of what
you do.

Complying with laws
and regulations

The top person is OSCR because they dictate charity law essentially. You need to
constantly look out for information that comes out from them. (T2)

Engaging the young
people
1. Being different
from the school
2. Protecting service
user privacy
3. Opportunities to
obtain a
qualification

They were so used to just being told at school that they were badly behaved and
when we actually sit down and say, “Well, what do you want to do?”, half the
time they are shocked that you're asking them because nobody really cared.
(Staff2)

Everyone loves coming here, you know, about the car parking, the cafe, it's a
nice clean building. (Trustee1)
He [CEO] knows where the niches in the markets are, the important need to put
our business towards to help people as much as possible. (T2)
Dundee has a population of a 139k people. 22k play football. And there ain't
enough pitches. Supply and demand. (Trustee1)
We've seen an [funding] opportunity, but we know that nobody does tech stuff.
Like everybody does sport and all that but nobody does that. And yet in Dundee
in five years’ time there will be six thousand new tech jobs. (Staff2)

You have to look at what's coming down the line as such. I mean clearly the
green agenda is coming down the line. […] That’s what I’m going to use to get to
that end of the game because the end game isn't about the environment. It’s
about the person that stays in those [deprived] areas. (CEO)

That's a very unassuming building and that's what we like about DST, that
anybody from any walk of life can walk through that door and nobody knows
what they're here for. (Trustee1)
We are an SQA centre. It's like youth work qualifications, football coaching
qualifications, first aid qualifications. All things that if you are going to apply for a
job, it shows somebody that you have taken an initiative to do something. That’s
always a plus. (Staff1)

Building and
maintaining
relationships

I work with the local schools, the youth workers, the family workers from the
schools, community cops, to deliver projects that basically get the kids off the
street into something else or into employability. (Staff1)

Securing funding
1. Researching the
funder
2. Evidencing

You need to know what the funders are looking to fund. It's like you have to
appeal to what they are funding for. Different councils want different things. So
Angus council, they're very interested in the VR because there's nothing in the
area. Or they [funders] might say, “We're interested, but we want to change
this” and then we would have to rewrite it slightly. (Staff2)
We've been working in partnership with the Prince’s Trust to trial them
[employability services] and now we've got a better firm base of what we can
do. (CEO)

121



4.2.2 Managing the duality of goals
CEO’s focus on social enterprise activities
According to the CEO, thinking of a charity in a business way is the most effective way of
addressing a need because it ensures organisational sustainability:
If you have no ability to continue to run that, why would you start it in the first place?
You're not actually helping those people. You're just building their hopes up to then dash
them again. But we haven't stopped. That's the difference. That’s making sure we are
business-like, but the business side of it actually helps people. (CEO)
The CEO’s influence is reflected in DST. DST is a registered charity but for a charity to be
successful “you have to run it like a business” (CEO). The Board “administers the charitable
company” (DST Annual Report 2022) but according to the two trustees interviewed in relation
to DST, the Board meetings do not occur regularly, and the meetings are “to be there, accept
an update and ask questions” (Trustee2). This brings the role of the CEO to the front. The staff
speak highly of the CEO’s vision and leadership and attribute the success of the organisation
to the CEO:
CEO is very good at networking and the funding side of things, and he drives us forward
all the time. (Trustee1)
DST’s aim has always been to make their Dundee’s facilities self-sustaining and independent
of external funding (DST Annual Reports 2003-2022). Of all the charities, DST has the largest
proportion of commercial income (76%) in its funding structure, and during the interviews
the staff often spoke in business language when describing their work and used the terms
such as “marketplace”, “business”, and “selling.”
Meeting customer needs
For the SE model to be successful, one must be good at it and understand the marketplace.
DST are based in “an old warehouse factory needing a lot of money” (Trustee2) but the
customers “want a nice facility” (CEO). To be attractive to customers, their premises must
match their standards and be of sufficient quality. For this reason, over the years DST has
made significant capital investments into the upgrade of its facilities. For example, in 2018

122



they invested £89,000 to replace the roof, installed an eco-friendly lighting system, and fitted
modern, 3D pitches7. In addition to quality facilities, the customers benefit from lower fees.
The SE model requires the management of business risks. Solely relying on dance as an offer
was perceived to be risky and DST expanded into sport and tech. Yet, they outsourced the
running of the café in the building to a specialist company because they lacked expertise in
this business:
Get a professional to do that and know what you are good at. (Trustee1)
In turn, DST believes that their SE model of income generation is attractive to funders because
they can demonstrate their ability to continue without reliance on grants and other forms of
external financing:
See when you apply for grants now, they ask you how you're going to sustain this once
the grant completes. We can say, “We’ve actually had grants that have stopped but
we've kept going with what we do.” That's making sure we are business-like. (Staff2)
Keeping the charitable mission in focus
The CEO claims that DST remains a charity despite their focus on the SE activities and argues
that the SE approach helps charities be more efficient. The SE model, thus, becomes a tool to
support the user because the money generated by their SE model is spent on supporting the
user:
I still call it as a charity because we are a charity, so it doesn't matter. This is where
people get mixed up with this. But because we do so many bits of work across the
community, in schools, we are still very much what we used to do, we are actually better
at doing it now. (CEO)
Whilst they charge the public for their classes, they keep it at a lower than commercial rate
because they “are mindful of the areas [they] serve” (DST Annual Report 2022). The same
pricing policy applies to the hire of its facilities by community groups. For example, the hire
of the football pitches for local youth teams costs £30 as opposed to £65 elsewhere. However,

7

3G stands for a Third-Generation synthetic surface which consists of three elements: synthetic turf, sand infill
and rubber infill. This combination of materials is installed with a shock absorbent pad to meet certain
performance and testing criteria such as the FIFA Quality Concept, World Rugby Regulation 22, and RFL.

123



where required the fees can be completely waived because they “are here to support, so that
people can still access it” (Staff1).

4.2.3 Linking with the local area
Building on the strengths of the local area
There are strong links between DST’s services and its location because in developing their
services they build on the characteristics of their area. In other words, the use of VR and
football as key mechanisms to deliver services to young people is not random. For example,
they suggest that their football pitches are “goldmine” (CEO) because of the football culture
of Dundee and the high demand for pitches. Despite the demand, there are not enough
football pitches in Dundee, which makes their offer highly attractive, and as a result their
pitches are always fully booked.
Developing distinctive local services
What they believe truly sets them apart is VR. They call it their “unique selling point”
(Trustee1) as there are no local providers of similar services in the area. VR “catches
everybody’s interest” (Staff2) and since it was introduced, it has attracted greater attention
to their work. They provide a VR tour one day every week to local schools and suggest that
VR has facilitated pupil attainment because “their ability to learn and understand just goes
through the roof” (Trustee2) and this allows them to extend their services to other user
groups, for example, young people with physical disabilities or autism:
If I've just done dance and sport that could have been fine. But now we have brought
that, this has taken us to a different level again. (CEO)
They place a higher emphasis on using VR in their services and believe they can benefit from
the growing interest in VR and Dundee’s supportive infrastructure:
VR is obviously very unique in Dundee, and nowadays the young people are so interested
in computing and gaming. The funders are quite interested in that. […] especially in
Dundee, with all the investment going into the computer side of things. Abertay
University obviously is massive for computer and cyber security and then we're getting
new games arena so that's feeding into the future. (Staff2)

124



4.2.4 Linking with wider societal developments
The CEO notes that societal needs change, and to stay relevant, they must be aware of the
developments in society and adapt accordingly. If they do not keep abreast of wider
developments in society, they risk falling behind:
If you stand still with anything, there is only so long you can go before culture,
technology, whatever changes. People look at other things to do and look at ways to be
engaged. (CEO)
The employment project that they introduced in 2021 was a response to the new needs
brought by the Covid pandemic, but they also linked it with the wider changes in employment
policies and the Young Person's Guarantee, launched in November 2020. These changes
presented them with a funding opportunity and helped secure contractual agreements with
the council. Once again, the project is linked with the key prominent features of Dundee
because VR and football are at the core of the project.
Their more recent project of a community centre built entirely from recycled materials is
linked with a growing climate change agenda. It has received support of other environmental
agencies and is presented to be the first construction of this sort in the UK. The community
centre will offer VR training, and other services.

4.2.5 Complying with rules and regulations
As a charity, they closely monitor the regulatory landscape, and constantly look out for
information that comes out from OSCR and follow the prescribed guidance because they must
be “credible in the eyes of OSCR” (Trustee2). The trustees ensure their policies are aligned
with charity law and OSCR and that the information they supply to OSCR is audited on an
annual basis.

4.2.6 Engaging the young people
Being different from the school
DST has a good record of the young people’s involvement in their services. DST explains their
success with the young people by how they contrast with the school and the home
environment. The young people are allowed to choose how and when they want to engage.
125



They do not force any activities on the young people and let them decide how to spend time
at DST. In terms of training that they provide, they make it more engaging for the young
people and offer the activities that cannot be accessed at school:
Whether it's sports or dance or whatever is to try and bring in lots of different elements
to the training rather than just sitting in a classroom because that hasn't worked. So
making it a bit more interesting for young people coming in. (Staff2)
Protecting service user privacy
DST operates from three large warehouses and due to multiple activities taking place and a
range of people in the building, this is an “anonymous building” (Trustee1) where the young
people can blend in:
They could come in and DST is a safe building, it's a safe space. They could sit and watch
TV, they could get a coffee, they could just use it as a recreational space. Or if they really
needed me, they could come in and speak to me in the office. (Staff1)
DST’s building is “not one single entity” (Trustee2) and when the researcher was visiting DST,
the building looked busy, and a range of different activities were taking place at one time.
There were large studios, pitches, rooms, and offices inside the building. Upon entering, the
researcher heard music from a dance studio on the left where a group of little girls had a
dance class. In a room opposite the dance studio a group of young women with kids had a
counselling session. Further down the hall a group of teenage boys was playing football. The
café was busy serving customers and in the back of the building a variety of the publics were
exploring the VR headsets connected to large thick wires falling down the ceiling top. No
single group of customers was apparent.
Opportunities to obtain a qualification
Their young people can also obtain qualifications from DST. As an accredited SQA centre, DST
awards qualifications that are not offered by the local schools. These are “the things that if
you are going to apply for a job, it shows somebody that you have taken an initiative to do
something” (CEO).
User feedback, in turn, helps DST with funding applications. DST uses feedback from the
young people to evidence both hard and soft outcomes of their work to the funder:

126



Feedback is massive. So not just a case of they attend, they leave and that's it. It's all
about progress. So it's about evidence. (Staff2)

4.2.7 Partnership working
DST’s approach is to “generally work in partnership with other organisations” (CEO) because
it allows them to enhance their services. The partners in the network can exchange their
resources and expertise for the benefit of the service user. The list of organisations with
whom DST has cooperated is provided in Appendix 10. DST, for example, closely collaborates
with another charity offering targeted employability support to the young people referred by
DST. Their networks are more fluid compared to other organisations and the analysis of their
documents (i.e., annual reports) show that many projects for which the funding was received
were one-off. For example, during Covid-19, they ran a collaborative project with a
community music group for the isolated young people. The fluidity of their networks reflects
their belief that as services develop, networks must be adapted accordingly:
…there'll be a huge shift in who's responsible for funding and who the partnerships need
to be built with. (Staff2)
Maintaining and building relationships with other organisations is necessary to make sure that
DST is “known basically to be here” (Staff1). Networks help show the young person progresses
from one stage of service delivery to another:
So usually, I would refer them on to the employability program at Street League so that
you can see that they're going on a journey, that they're not just coming to us and it's
stopping. (Staff1)
While maintaining existing relationships is within the purview of the staff team who are in
regular contact with the referral agencies, the CEO focuses on developing strategic
partnerships, which are mutually beneficial for all. For example, the funding from F15 was
secured after a meeting attended by the CEO, and according to the funder they continue to
support DST with their expertise because the project “can become a demonstrator” of the
funder’s work to others.

127



4.2.8 Securing funding
Researching the funder
DST believes that to be attractive to the funder, they need to understand the funder to be
able to appeal to their interests. Dundee, for example, “is more of a sports culture” (Staff2),
and therefore, the funders in Dundee are likely to be more attracted to projects with football
at the core. Researching the needs of the funder also helps package the services in a way that
meets those needs, and at DST they suggest that their service delivery model is flexible
enough to do that:
DST can adapt as well, so it can be sports based, it can be VR based, and it can be
employability. You are not just stuck in one lane. (Trustee1)
Evidencing
As was mentioned previously, in their funding applications DST emphasize that they have
their own funds to be able to continue running the project they seek funding for. They follow
wider trends in society to monitor changes in interests, keep abreast of policy developments
to adjust services accordingly and seek to build on the core strengths of Dundee to enhance
their service delivery. They engage in networking to develop new services and work with
others to demonstrate how the user progresses from one stage to another. They also pilot
services so that they have “a better firm base of what DST can do” (CEO). Importantly, they
use stakeholder feedback to show value of their services to the community and evidence both
hard and soft outcomes of their work.

128



4.3 Case study 3. Animal and Play Therapy
4.3.1 Background
APT is based in Selkirk and supports vulnerable young people, aged 10-18 years, on a referral
basis. These young people are generally experiencing social, emotional and/or behavioural
issues and are supported through equine assisted learning (EAL)8. It also offers a variety of
equine services to the public including horse riding lessons and countryside hacking.
Selkirk is one of Scotland’s oldest Royal Burghs with a population of around 5,000 people
(National Records of Scotland, 2022c). A highlight of Selkirk is the annual Common Riding
celebration in June which hosts one of the largest cavalcades of up to 400 horses and riders
in Europe (Selkirk Community Council, 2023).
They have 10 staff, and two teams. “The professional top” (Chair) of APT is the CEO and the
Director of Children's Services. The CEO has background in business development, and she
has been with APT for over 10 years providing support to the Project Team. In her role, she is
responsible for submitting funding applications. The Director of Children's Services is an
equine specialist and a former family support worker, but she also supports the CEO with
funding applications, building partnerships, and strategic planning. They have seven trustees
who live locally and as the CEO suggested they tend to volunteer and help her with office
admin, maintenance and even running classes for the young people. For example, the Chair
whom the researcher met during the visit delivered a session for a group of three young
people from the local high school later in the day. Two of the trustees, including the Chair,
are the members of the local Rotary Club9. The Board have a sub-fundraising committee who
fundraise for APT via, for example, a pop-up shop at Christmas, raffles, home baking, and the
Kiltwalk.
In 2020 the total revenue of APT was £456,124, of which 35% were generated by the
commercial activities. The charity income includes £30,000 from commissioned work, and the
charity gets an annual donation of £7,000 from the council to cover the costs for the young
8

EAL is an educative method based on experiential learning processes, and addresses individuals’ emotional
and behavioural difficulties through the presence of and direct contact with a horse (Dell et al., 2011)
9
Rotary International is a humanitarian service organisation that exists to provide community service, and
advance goodwill, peace, and understanding in the world. There are over 46,000 member clubs worldwide,
with a membership of 1.4 million individuals (Rotary, 2023).

129





in Need, Big Lottery, Robertson Trust, and others and secure grants to run the three distinct
projects that they had at the time:
•

Alternative Routes — learning skills for life

•

Chance4Change—befriending/mentoring

•

“Stable” Life – equine assisted learning

In 2013, the charity was struggling to secure funding and after they researched “the
possibilities for future developments and the sustainability of the organisation” (APT
website), they made “Stable” Life the core service, took the lease on a riding centre in Selkirk
and relocated there. Table 4.3 outlines the key processes that APT engages in to enact their
legitimacy. These are divided into seven groups and each group includes several approaches
that APT uses to gain approval, obtain an endorsement, or secure support of their
environment.

4.3.2 Maintaining a balanced funding portfolio
Prioritising the charitable mission
The lease gave them opportunities to generate income through riding lessons, hacks, and
hiring out of the school to the members of the public. It helped APT “change sustainability of
the organisation” (Chair), however, unlike DST, they do not place an emphasis on generating
higher levels of commercial income and believe that sustainability can be achieved by a more
balanced mix of funding:
We looked at how we could become more sustainable and in an ideal world, it would be
a third from grants, a third from the commercial side and a third from commissioned
work through the local authority. (CEO)
APT has a commercial arm and are familiar with the social enterprise concept, however they
do not actively use the term when discussing their commercial riding centre, nor they
explicitly call themselves as such. The term was mentioned once. "The point of APT was
always to be where that would sustain itself” (Staff1) but the most important are “the people
who use the services” (Chair).

131



Table 4.3 APT – processes supporting organisational legitimacy
How Seeks to Legitimise
Maintaining a balanced
funding portfolio
1. Prioritizing the
charitable mission
2. Establishing a
commissioning
framework
3. Meeting customer
needs
4. Leveraging their local
embeddedness

Illustrative Quotes
At the end of the day, you don't want the yard full of publics when we're
working with the kids with various issues. You want this privacy. (CEO)

Linking with wider societal
developments

A lot of what we do here will be dictated at some point by what’s decided by
the Scottish Government and the local authorities as far as funding goes, as
far as policies go, as far as the whole education thing, you know, we try to sell
what we do here. (Chair)
You have to sit within the confines of the British Association of Play
Therapists. You have to follow the guidelines. There's all the confidentiality,
there's the ethics and everything that you follow. (Staff1)

Complying with laws and
rules

Engaging the young people
1. Being different from
the school
2. Non-directive
services
3. Protecting service
user privacy
4. It has to be about the
child

[…] now we've kind of said, actually do you know what, they've accessed their
funded space so it would be a paid provision but again, it's about me being
able to have those conversations and evidence base what I do and what my
team does. (Staff1)
Last year we were having the arena rebuilt almost. It was a shell. (Staff3)
You get parents doing that (and then you get other people that have maybe
heard through a relative or some friend. Sometimes it's word of mouth,
somebody is talking about it. Like the local Rotary group that is in Selkirk have
been really supportive of us. (CEO)

It's just such a calming environment. And it's just away from school. And they
come here and there's no expectations on them and there is just no pressure
to do well. (Staff2)
The play therapy is non-directive. So, none of that would be led - that's led by
the child. They completely decide what they're going to do and the theory
behind it is that the individual has within themselves whatever it is that they
need to heal themselves. (Staff1)
We have to write up case studies, have them in a folder if we need to have
evidence. Statistically we look at what we're seeing, and we record that on
Outcome Stars in the time that they've been in and we tend to use that data
when we're applying for funding. (CEO)

Partnership working

Building on staff expertise

Securing funding
1. Researching the
funder
2. Evidencing

It's been the buzzword for a few years, you know, partnership, collaboration...
You get more chance if you're stronger basically. (Chair)
I think that is what kind of helped with the Selkirk High School was the fact
that because for them it's helping the young people, but it's also helping them
with their figures. (CEO)
We offer something different. I can't think of anything else nearby that offers
what we offer in the EAL and rural skills. We're pretty special in that sense.
(Staff2)
Somebody looking for funding has got to make sure that we're right on the
ball for what we want. That's going to match exactly what these funders are
looking for. (Chair)
There’s a lot of really good research now, which is quite handy when we do
our funding bids. I bring why what we do works and who said it worked.
(Staff1)

132



To protect the mission and maintain their legitimacy as a charity, they split into two separate
teams: the yard team in charge of the riding lessons for the public and the project team who
support the young people with EAL and play therapy11.
Moreover, the commercial lessons are offered only in the second half of the day when there
are no service users on the premises. This helps protect the privacy of the young people and
maintain the focus on the core charitable aim:
We've got the charity here during the day, we cannot have a lot of customers coming in
when we're providing this therapeutic space for the kids. We're always looking at ways
to grow that [SE]. But at the end of the day, you don’t want it to impact on the charity
so that the charity shrinks and we're not actually supporting the kids as what we're
supposed to do. (CEO)
They suggest that for this reason they do not actively promote themselves via the website
and other social media. Occasionally they accept referrals from other local authority areas,
but they are reluctant to expand to these areas because this would mean fewer places would
be available for the local young people while their “constitution is supporting young people
who require it in the Scottish Borders.” (Staff2)
Establishing a commissioning framework
Establishing a commissioning framework between the charity and its referring partners is “the
key pillar of APT’s medium-term business plan” (APT Annual Report 2022) and gaining the
funding support back from the council has been a goal since the council removed it in 2008.
A major difficulty, though, is that the local council is reluctant to pay for the services that it
got used to receive for free:
The majority, 90 percent of our referrals come through education and social work. We
have been able in the past to actually offer our services for nothing to the local authority
because we've got our grant funding and then trying to change that mindset with the
local authority has been and is an ongoing battle. (CEO)

11

Play therapy is a form of therapy used primarily for children. A trained therapist can use playtime to observe
and gain insights into a child’s problems, and help the child explore emotions and deal with unresolved
trauma. It is practiced by licensed mental health professionals, like psychologists (Healthline, 2021)

133



Achieving progress with this objective has been difficult because all the children’s services in
the area have been commissioned to another national charity, and “it should be [national
charity] that are providing the service as such” (CEO). Changing their mindset involves
continuous conversations and evidencing the benefits of the work that APT delivers. Prior to
2018 all the services of APT were free for the schools but in 2018 APT changed their funding
arrangements with the schools who refer their young people (Figure 4.3). They first removed
a policy of transporting the young people to and from the school. In 2018 they moved away
from open-ended programs with unlimited support and introduced two structured programs
of support, a 10-week individual program and a 17-week group-based program. Later, they
placed a limit on the duration of free services that the schools could get, and if a young person
is referred second time, the service must be commissioned through the local authority.
Meeting customer needs
APT’s objective is to grow their commercial income without losing sight of their charitable
mission. Their riding centre is no different from a typical riding centre. Like DST, APT suggests
that to attract customers they must be able to offer quality facilities and has, therefore,
invested in refurbishing them. For example, in 2019 they raised £15,000 through a
crowdfunding campaign to refurbish their indoor riding arena, which was “really on its last
legs” (Staff2). This was not directly linked with the customers, though, because the arena is
for the use by both the yard team and the project team.
During her visit, the researcher was shown around the stables and told that ponies can be of
different sizes and differ in their abilities. These ponies’ characteristics determine what APT
can offer to the public. Their ponies cannot handle heavy weights or perform tasks such as
jumping, and therefore, most of their classes are for kids and/or beginners. Knowing their
abilities is important to avoid harming the pony and to prevent creating a bad experience for
a rider. Their ponies are also of a gentler character because they work with young people.
Leveraging their local embeddedness
APT is critical of national charities delivering local services and they have made attempts to
influence the decision-making at the council level via their membership at Youth Borders, the
umbrella organisation that represents the sector to the council. Joined by other organisations,
they continuously encourage the council to work with the local organisations in the Borders:
134



It's just like for years we keep saying, look at what is in the Borders locally because there
is not only just us, there are really good organisations supporting young people and work
with what you've got instead of just following down the line the other local authorities.
[CEO]
Nevertheless, the local community is aware of the work of the charity. The link with the local
community is actively maintained by their trustees. For example, the Chair is the president of
a local Rotary club that regularly fundraises for APT. Finally, APT raised funds through a local
crowdfunding campaign. They achieved their target and were happy with the result, but it
required a lot of advertising and promotion and “pushing it” (CEO). Most of the donors were
locals.

4.3.3 Linking with wider societal developments
The growth of commissioned services was linked with the changes in the educational
requirements to schools in Scotland or the Curriculum for Excellence12. In 2019, APT ran a
pilot of a two-year project to deliver SQAs to the local high schools. During the pilot, the SQAs
were offered for free, and at the end of the pilot, a participating school added the SQAs to
the list of subjects for their pupils. APT now delivers SQA qualifications in horse care and rural
skills for the young people referred by the school and funded from the school’s budget:
The Scottish Government is now saying to schools that they want kids to leave school
with at least four SQAs or something like that. For some of the young kids that are
struggling if they can get two SQAs through us, and then if they get their English and
Math with their high school, they're almost reaching that target sort of thing. (Staff3)
What they believe has helped them achieve progress with commissioned services is that the
school “bought into” (CEO) the fact that sending their pupils to APT to obtain SQAs improves
their statistics:
It's all about how many kids leave with qualifications. It's a numbers game. (Chair)

12

Curriculum for Excellence is the national curriculum for Scottish schools for learners from the ages 3–18.

135



In terms of funding, their adaptation to the environmental changes helps them develop new
projects, and because they believe the funders are interested in funding new services,
accordingly these projects will be attractive for them:
Quite often it's hard to get funding for projects that are already running, everybody
wants to see a new project. So quite often we can do something. (Staff1)

4.3.4 Complying with rules and regulations
APT will be liable to OSCR for reporting the wrong figures to the funders and if it happens,
“then that can close [APT]” (Staff3). Therefore, to legitimise with regulators they must comply
with the guidance of the charity regulator. APT also follows the guidance of the relevant
professional body, the British Association of Play Therapists.13 To facilitate this, they have
implemented the processes that allow them to evidence their compliance with requirements
such as filing and tracking all the financial expenditures and others:
When it's European funding, everything has to be triple crossed off and you're not
claiming for something that wasn't in the actual original budget. […] there's certain
things that you have to have in like folders. (Staff2)
The extra control is provided by a trustee with financial background who has “a very tight rein
on what is going on in the finances” (Chair).

4.3.5 Engaging young people
Being different from the school
APT works with the children who often display challenging behaviours at school and/or at
home, however, the staff suggest that these situations are rare, and they almost never
observe the behaviours:
You can read a referral and go, “My, this is going to be really difficult”, and they come
in and they're nothing like what's written on the piece of paper and that happens a lot.
(Staff2)

13

British Association of Play Therapists is a register for play therapists in the UK. It is accredited by the
Professional Standards Authority as part of the Accredited Registers Programme (British Association of Play
Therapists, 2014).

136



The staff explain it in terms of the space that they have at APT. They suggest that it is very
different from the school environment, which they describe as too oppressive and hostile for
the young people and believe that “for some the school environment is not good and they
really struggle” (CEO). At APT children learn in an environment that is safe, non-judgemental,
and non-evaluative.
Non-directive services
There is little direct involvement of the staff in the delivery of services, and all the learning
activities are based on play and interaction with a horse. The horse is “a therapist” (Staff3)
and is one of the tools that they provide to the young people to help them “heal themselves”
(Staff1). The child is matched with an appropriate service and appropriate staff because the
staff have individual strengths, and some, for example, are more nurturing than others, and
the kids are then allowed to choose how they want to engage:
They can pick their own themes. They can choose to play. They can choose not to play.
(…) it's going to be much more effective for you than if I go, “I think you should try this”
because that's right for me, not for you. (Staff1)
Protecting service user privacy
APT suggest that they offer a safe space to the young people and protect their privacy not
only from the public but also from the school. Going to APT for help instead of receiving it at
school shields them from stigma because at school "all the eyes are on them” (CEO).
It has to be about the child
EAL places the needs of a child to the centre, and accordingly, “it has to be about the child”
(Staff1), but the difficulty that APT sometimes face is different expectations from teachers
and parents as to what a child should achieve:
Feedback is a bit of a double-edged sword because it can be very much dependent upon
that person's perception of what they thought the child should achieve. I think the
difference is we work for the outcomes of the child. (Staff2)
APT has started to be more attentive to managing these expectations and engaging in more
educational work with these groups, so that they can begin to have a better understanding of
EAL and what APT aims to achieve in their sessions with young people.
137



4.3.6 Partnership working
The young people are referred from across Scottish Borders from agencies such as school,
social work, the National Health Service, CAMHS and other voluntary agencies, who according
to APT are very supportive of them:
We've got fantastic relationships. We do a lot of partnership working with them, and
they know the difference that we can make to young people, so they really sign off on
us. (Staff3)
APT believes they can do more for the young person and enhance services if they work in
partnership with others but note that “everybody wants to protect their organisation” (CEO),
and it is “that initial getting the partners on board” (Chair) that is important. They suggest
that potential partners must perceive certain benefits from a partnership. For example,
having learned about a growing number of referrals of younger children (whom APT usually
works with) to Penumbra and the lack of their capacity to support this younger age group,
they approached Penumbra with a proposal to submit a joint tender.
In terms of funding, the networks help in several ways. First, they improve chances of funding
because “it’s been the buzzword” (Chair) and the funders are increasingly interested in joint
bids. Second, because “you have got to come up with a different approach or a different result
at the end of the day” (Staff2), together with other organisations they can propose new
projects. The list of organisations with whom APT has cooperated is provided in Appendix 11.

4.3.7 Building on staff expertise
APT tends to be the “the last point of contact” (CEO) for referrers because previous
interventions have not been effective. APT has a good track record of supporting young
people who experience more complex social, emotional and/or behavioural issues. APT
suggests that their good track record with young people is underpinned by the unique skills
set of their staff, which makes them different from regular riding centres, but also from other
charities that address behavioural issues.
APT’s staff have backgrounds in both supporting the kids and working with horses. In other
words, the staff possess a rare combination of highly specialised areas of expertise, which
allows them to apply a non-traditional approach to tackling mental health issues and
138



addressing more complex behaviours. Their backgrounds include counselling, trauma focused
therapy, play therapy and nursing, but they are also professional or experienced riders, and
all the staff at APT have all been trained in EAL and therapy. The young person is then
individually matched with a project worker with the most appropriate background to deal
with the issue, making it a customized, often one-to-one service. They believe there are few
riding centres in the country that can match their services:
I think it provides not just one thing. There's a whole horse side to it and emotional
support. I think nearby there isn't anything else that offers the same. We're pretty
special in that sense. (Staff2)

4.3.8 Securing funding
Researching the funder
Finding funding is “a never-ending battle” (Chair). The CEO believes that funders have
different motives and a family trust, for example, is driven by individual beliefs of a family
whereas bigger, national funders are interested in how funding charities can help them with
their goals and fundraising appeals, and so researching their interests helps find alignment
with what funders look to achieve, and describe a project in a way that communicates the fit:
I've always been taught to never try and fit what you do to fit the funding. The funding
should fit what it is that you do because then you just end up in a whole lot of a trouble.
(CEO)
Evidencing
In their funding applications, APT includes evidence of their effectiveness. They suggest that
they evidence base the results of their work to the funder using stakeholder feedback and
supporting it with research on the benefits of EAL. They keep a repository of case studies and
encourage the staff to update it frequently to pull the information when necessary because
“that might be the bid that seals it for APT” (Staff1). Piloting a service becomes important
because it helps build evidence base as when for example, through the trial of the SQA project
they persuaded the high school to commission APT to deliver SQAs to their pupils.

139



4.4 Case study 4. Employment Training and Recreation
4.4.1 Background
Employment Training and Recreation’s (ETR) mission statement is “to improve the quality of
life of young people, aged 9 – 29, in [town] and the surrounding rural area” (ETR website,
2022). They run youth clubs for children aged 9-14 and focus on the provision of employment
and training opportunities for the young people. The mission is achieved via the “two social
enterprises” (ETR website), Hostel and Functions. The hostel offers several types of rooms to
cater for the different needs of customers and hosts functions but is used as a venue to offer
Modern Apprenticeship (MA)14 opportunities to the young people. ETR is an accredited SQA
centre and awards industry-standard qualifications. They deliver the Steps to Work
programme15, offer 1-1 sessions tailored to an individual’s specific needs and circumstances
and help the young people write a CV, prepare for a job interview, and apply to college. They
also source industry-standard qualifications externally. These include Food Safety certificates
(Hospitality), SFA Coaching Awards (Football), First Aid certification and Higher English
courses at local colleges.
ETR is based in a small town in a rural area and according to the National Records of Scotland
(2022c) it has a population of 3,000 people. The town has scenic views to the nature and
VisitScotland (2022) describe the town as “the gateway to the Highlands”. It is surrounded by
forests, lochs, waterfalls, hills, glens, and mountains. It is “a bustling tourist town”
(Undiscovered Scotland, 2023) with routes to explore natural and historical attractions in
Scotland and is a popular tourist stop to and from the Highlands. There is plenty of
accommodation on offer in the town ranging from small hotels, guest houses and BandBs.
There is one high school founded in 1892 and educating pupils from a wide catchment area
beyond the town. Yet, despite the picturesque landscape, it remains quite an isolated rural
area. The town is 26 km away from a major city.

14

A Modern Apprenticeship is a job which lets people earn a wage and gain an industry-recognised
qualification (Skills Development Scotland, 2022)
15
Steps to Work is designed to help vulnerable, disengaged, and hard to reach learners. Within the Steps to
Work Awards there is a wide range of Units to choose from. This gives centres the flexibility to develop a
program that best suits the needs and interests of their learners (SQA, 2013)

140



ETR has a very small core staff team of two people and a part-time fundraiser (ETR website).
The CEO’s background is hospitality, and she joined ETR as the Head of Hospitality in 2014, to
oversee the SEs but has become more heavily involved in the delivery of the youth service
elements of their work. She became the manager of ETR in early 2020. She is an in-house
Internal verifier16 and oversees the delivery of SQA-accredited qualifications. She is assisted
by the Senior Youth Worker responsible for the youth clubs and employability programs, but
the two often complement each other. They have three temporary staff who are the young
people doing their MAs and who provide support while getting on-the-job training. Yet, the
board tends to be quite hands-on, rather literally, compared to other case study
organisations. During online interviews with the staff in their office held on different days, at
least one or two trustees were always on-site helping run day-to-day activities. The researcher
also met four of them during her visit. The fundraiser of ETR suggests that ETR has one of the
strongest boards she has ever seen:
It's like he [trustee] physically works there. By that I mean building things and knocking
things down and installing things. (Fundraiser)
The involvement of the Board into day-to-day running of the organisation is likely to be
related with the fact that ETR had “a series of what you might call project leaders” (F4) and
effectively the Board was running the charity, which is what the Chair is trying to change:
[…] everyone quite likes to get involved, and that's not our job. The job of the trustees
and the board is to set the strategy, and then let the staff get on with it. (Chair)
67% of ETR’s funding is from grants and the remainder 33% is made up of the function income
and accommodation income (ETR Financial Statements, 2022). Of the grant income, £10,000
or 3.7% is an annual donation from Stirling Council towards the youth club.
ETR presented a unique opportunity to explore the role of the funder in the development of
the organisation. ETR was established in 1997 following the two young people’s suicides from
the local high school to address the isolation and lack of access to amenities for the young
people (Figure 4.4).

16

Internal Verifiers manage the delivery and quality assurance of the assessment process, to ensure that
workplace assessments of individuals’ competence and performance meet relevant quality standards (SQA,
2023)

141





centre to deliver industry-standard qualifications and secured funding from Skills
Development Scotland (SDS) and other funders who support the delivery of MAs.
Table 4.4 outlines the key processes that ETR engages in to enact their legitimacy. These are
divided into six groups and each group includes several approaches that ETR uses to gain
approval, obtain an endorsement, or secure support of their environment.

4.4.2 Managing the duality of goals
Maintaining a diversified funding portfolio
Like DST and APT, ETR runs a SE, but the charitable and SE activities are more closely
interlinked. The hostel generates income for the charity, but it also gives them the
opportunity to offer work placements and MAs, which “is a very important part of what ETR
do” (CEO) and allows it to “fulfil all their social objectives” (F4). The income from the hostel
gives the charity “a bit of wiggle room” (Chair) because it is unrestricted and can be spent on
where they see fit. Yet, the income is not sufficient to fund entire projects, and in 2018 they
employed a fundraising coordinator to bring in other sources of income:
We're always trying to be more innovative and to do more for young people rather than
just settling on the amount that we can fund out of the social enterprise. (Chair)
The interviewees agree that having a diversified funding mix is important as relying solely on
one source of income can be risky and can “work against you” (Fundraiser). In 2022 ETR
expanded their accommodation provision by building four self-contained glamping pods:
We can't necessarily make it off the social enterprise money. We're actually putting in
the camping pods to provide that sustainability. Our feeling was that we couldn't
increase social enterprise turnover in any other way, and we didn't want to stray too far
away from the business model that we were following, and we didn't want to be really
scrambling around for grant income to stay in operation year after year after year.
(CEO)

143



Table 4.4 ETR – processes supporting organisational legitimacy
How Seeks to legitimise
Managing the duality of goals
1. Maintaining a diversified
funding portfolio
2. Prioritizing the
charitable mission
3. Meeting customer
needs

Linking with the local area
1. Linking services with the
local needs
2. Covid disproportionately
impacting rural areas

Illustrative Quotes
If we can say we're getting our match funding from the social enterprise, it
actually works a lot better for us. (Chair)
We're not a business. Everything we do is not to line somebody's pocket.
It's to make sure that ETR can continue and be self-sustainable and that
young people are always going to have something that'll help them and
keep them going. That's why we've done the pods. (CEO)
As they are ensuite and self-contained [pods] in the post-Covid world
they're needed in terms of accommodation around here. The accessible
pod is going to be a unique facility. (Staff1)
If you're staying locally and you're not going on to university, then it
[hospitality] is one of the main areas for getting a job. (Chair).
ETR is about supporting young people who live in a very rural isolated part
of Scotland […] they're all groups that have particularly suffered from the
pandemic and funders are looking to fund in that area. (Fundraiser)

Robust governance processes
1. Complying with laws and
rules
2. Ensuring well-principled
governance

In youth work it's very important to have people who fully understand the
safeguarding issues, and our board have got that experience in significant
measure. (CEO)

Engaging the young people
1. Building longer-term
relationships
2. Offering a choice of
qualifications
3. Maintaining a flexible
approach

The whole idea for ETR is to help as many people as they can, put them on
all these different amazing training courses, give them experience, and
then they can go on and get another job. It's like a steppingstone. (Staff2)

The grant giving community is relatively small in Scotland. if you fail to
deliver, it pretty much gets around. Hence being honest and transparent is
extremely important. (Chair)

In one-to-one work with referred pupils, I can keep it a bit lighter, a bit less
dry than 10 worksheets to them that they have to work through one by
one and check all the boxes, and it helps keep the young people engaged
more. (Staff1)
Funders like a mix of both. They want data and they want numbers, but
they also want case studies and photos and all that stuff. We can use bits
and pieces and just put together. (CEO)

Maintaining the link with key
partners

Securing funding
1. Researching the funder
2. Evidencing

The school speak to us. it's the regular progress meetings. The school
checks with all the school leavers to find out what destinations people are
leaving school to go to. (Staff1)
It's important to make sure you know how each funder works. (Chair)
When we trialled things, that worked really well for certain groups, and it
didn't work at all for other groups. Funders also really like that feedback.
(Fundraiser)

144



The fundraiser suggests that a lot of the funders ask for match funding, and their SE income
places them in a better position because they can match fund if necessary. Having some
funding in place makes it a stronger application. The view is echoed by the CEO and the Chair:
We've already got money for the equipment. We're now looking to get all the refurb
done and refit done. So, we've got part funding and the group we went to liked the fact
that we've already tried to get funding. (CEO)
However, ETR is mindful of the relative proportion of a particular source of income in the
overall funding structure as for example, too much unrestricted income from the SE may in
certain cases affect grant funding:
There is also a danger that to be honest that if funders saw that you were basically selfsustainable, they'd probably be less inclined to give you grants. (Chair)
Prioritizing the charitable mission
Despite the interlinkages between the charitable and commercial elements, the CEO and the
Chair have both emphasized that above all they are a charity, and in the interviews the staff
tended to stress their focus on training:
We're absolutely saying that we're a youth project that owns a business. We're not a
business that has a youth project. We could run without it, but it allows us to train young
people. Everything we do is geared towards what we can do for the young people in this
area. (CEO)
As a business the hostel must be managed properly but the charitable aims should always be
a priority and any tensions created by the commercial side must be properly dealt with. Until
2020, ETR had two separate websites for the hostel and for the charity, which created
difficulties because they were increasingly becoming recognised as the hostel. In August 2020
they created a new logo and brought the two websites together, so that whenever someone
googles the hostel, they are taken to a booking page on the charity website. Another tension
was created by the café in the hostel. They felt they “were being busy fools” (Staff1) because
it absorbed the management time and moved the focus of the staff away from the charitable
activities. They closed the café in 2018. Yet, they have emphasized the charitable objectives
of their commercial eco pods project, and £75,000 of grant funding was raised towards the
accessible pod since “the idea that the pod is not for us to make money” (Fundraiser) and
145



another £36,000 were raised towards the other three pods on the grounds that the income
would be used to train more MAs.
Meeting customer needs
Even though the organisation and its members “are not here to run the hostel” (CEO), they
“have got to take a business-like view of it” (Chair). ETR’s services for customers match
comparable commercial services. The hostel and other facilities that ETR offers must be of
good quality, and ETR has been investing into the upgrade of their facilities. When the
researcher first interviewed the CEO in 2020, a record was made that the hostel was
renovated in 2014. When the researcher visited ETR in 2021, the hostel had just been
renovated again and they had installed new furniture and bathroom equipment. The
researcher was taken on a tour around the hostel and the glamping pods. The rooms were
bright, clean, and spacious with views to the nature and Ben Ledi. They had converted the
dorms into separate rooms to comply with the Covid restrictions and to make it more
attractive for families with children to come and stay.
Their glamping pods just opened, and each had a cosy porch to sit outside and enjoy the
views. ETR contracted the architectural agency to design the pods but actively participated in
the design feeding their ideas for the pods. One of the pods is larger than the other three
because it has been designed for people with complex disability needs. The researcher met
one of their trustees with the construction background there. He oversaw the
implementation of the project and explained that it is a unique construction in central
Scotland. As such, they believe it opens them up to a new set of customers. The remainder
three are ensuite and self-contained, and were built in response to demand:
The three pods are really popular. They like the view. It seems to have everything they
need. The feedback and the reviews have been good. (Staff1)

4.4.3 Linking with the local area
Linking services with the local needs
Like for DST, there is a close association between ETR’s services and the area where they are
based. “Catering and hospitality are the lifeblood of the area” (Staff2), and all the
interviewees suggested that the economy of the town is based on tourism. As F4 was looking
146



to replace the program that failed to generate sufficient interest among the young people,
they realised the significant role that tourism can play in local service provision. Subsequently
they embraced the idea of providing hospitality training to the local young people:
Now actually the key skill in the [area] for young people is actually tourist support.
Hospitality. It is not farming, forestry and all that other stuff. (F4)
The consultations with the local hoteliers revealed a need in qualified personnel and setting
up a hospitality training centre was of benefit to the organisation and to the town. The staff
explained that if the young people stay locally, then catering and hospitality are one of the
main areas for getting a job. Even though ETR closed the café, during the pandemic they
spotted an opportunity to provide training in catering to address the local need:
During Covid we had a chef volunteered in for the local community doing hot meals twice
a week for vulnerable residents, and they were using our kitchen. We thought, “Here's a
way that we can give new training opportunities - we've got somebody who's capable
of doing it, we've got the premises, we know that there's young people at the school
who are interested in this, but we know that our kitchen needs to be upgraded.” (Chair)
Covid disproportionately impacting rural areas
Covid has had broader implications for ETR as it put a spotlight on the user groups supported
by ETR. Compared to previous years when ETR struggled to get solid funding in place, “funnily
enough with Covid this year has been somewhat easier” (Chair). The funding opportunities
for ETR are increasing since the funders have recognised the impact of Covid on rural families
and have a higher interest in supporting groups such as children and young people who are
believed to have particularly suffered from the pandemic:
You know kids have left school not with the qualifications that they thought they would
or are struggling to reengage back into education after the impact of lockdown. So, the
need for having that paid training opportunity locally is really important. (Fundraiser)

4.4.4 Robust governance processes
Complying with laws and rules
ETR is accountable to OSCR and the Companies House and must comply with their regulation.
Because they are engaged in youthwork, they must ensure the staff fully understand the
147



safeguarding issues. In addition, as an SQA centre they are accountable to SQA and SDS who
audit them every year to detail the performance against SQA Accreditation’s regulatory
requirements. According to the CEO, they keep the records for each MAs for six years. In
addition, they must submit a quality action plan annually to demonstrate how they meet the
requirements, which can sometimes be too demanding:
It's really difficult for us to get a lot of equality in here particularly because we don't live
in an area with a lot of ethnic minorities and every year we have to go back and say,
“There is only two ethnic minorities in the school in this area so far.” (CEO)
Ensuring well-principled governance
The staff tend to emphasize that sound reputation is important for a charity. The “essence of
reputation” (Chair) is delivering on the promises made. For example, in relation to funding
they must ensure that the funding that they have received is spent in line with the conditions
of the grant, and to maintain their trust, any difficulties that arise should be discussed with
funders:
You've got to be seen to be well run and be able to achieve what you say that you're
going to achieve and be successful in doing that. A good reputation is worth its weight
in gold to be honest. (Chair)
They view accurate and transparent reporting as part of communication and relationship
building with external audiences, and with a funder in particular. Because they have several
funders to report to, they must “be very organised” (Chair), and for this purpose ETR has an
internal database where they collect and store receipts, photos, stakeholder surveys and
feedback from young people, case studies, and other statistics.

4.4.5 Engaging the young people
Building longer-term relationships
The engagement strategies that ETR uses depend on the age group of the young people. The
younger groups are engaged though the play-based activities of the youth club. On the surface
it “is all just about fun and having a laugh” (Staff2), but the actual purpose of the youth club
is to build an early relationship between ETR and the young people so that they feel more
comfortable to engage if they need help later:
148



It's a lot easier to build the relationships now than it is going in cold in five- or six-years'
time when they maybe need more support with employability or social stuff or housing.
If we have a relationship that we've already cultivated to fall back on, that's a big help
further down the line. (Staff1)
Offering a choice of qualifications
The employability programs tend to be for older groups of young people who are “hard to
reach, have fallen out of education and have not got a job” (Chair). Older groups tend to
engage if they perceive certain benefits from a service. The benefit of their Steps to Work
program, for example, is that it helps young people finish school with qualifications while MAs
provide both training and paid employment. According to MAs they were attracted by the
opportunity to take the courses of interest for free:
I got to do so many cool training courses and experiences, which make my CV look a lot
better now from the outdoor adventure aspect of it. (Staff2)
Maintaining a flexible approach
The Steps to Work program can be a “bit restrictive” (Staff1) because the young people must
complete all the units to get an award certificate. Instead, ETR has a more flexible approach.
They allow the young people to choose the training elements of the program that are of most
interest to them, which helps keep young people engaged more. Yet, it is valued by the young
people:
If I was really uncomfortable, they wouldn't make me do anything that I really didn't like.
If I didn't like being on the bar, I would probably be helping serving food or preparing the
food in the kitchen instead. (Staff3)

4.4.6 Maintaining the link with key partners
Compared to other case study organisations, ETR does not seem to have as many links and
the main link exists between ETR and the local high school. The list of organisations with
whom ETR has cooperated is provided in Appendix 12. This relationship between ETR and the
high school has been particularly strong. The youth worker has regular progress meetings

149



with the Developing the Young Workforce School Coordinator17 at the school to “make sure
that they are happy with how the sessions are going”. However, because the youth worker is
based at the school, feedback tends to be more informal.

4.4.7 Securing funding
Researching the funder
Understanding the funder, their criteria and doing research around them also helps in finding
the funder who “fits with you” (Chair). The fundraiser usually looks at their annual accounts
to see what projects they have funded or how much funding they distribute in Scotland. This,
according to her, helps her flesh out their interests which she can emphasize in her funding
applications. Yet, the fundraiser suggests that an application should stand out. The fundraiser
does enjoy writing, and her writing skills have been highlighted on several occasions in the
feedback from funders.
Evidencing
Like other case study organisations, ETR emphasizes the use of evidence in funding
applications. They include stakeholder feedback, case-studies, and relevant figures and stats.
Piloting a service can be powerful prior to applying because it helps provide evidence. For
example, training in catering was first run as a pilot and on the back of its success, they got
funding for the new kitchen equipment and the chef’s salary:
It looked brilliant. I’d send a couple pictures of the chef with the young people that did
the pilot and what they cooked. I mean it's a huge difference. (Fundraiser)

17

Developing the Young Workforce School Coordinator supports the implementation of a program of
employer engagement aimed at increasing pupils’ career awareness and skills development as part of realising
the Young Person Guarantee (Scottish Government, 2021).

150



Chapter summary
This chapter has presented the key themes that emerged within each case study organisation.
Particularly, this chapter has provided an empirical illustration of the key elements that relate
to organisational legitimacy and contribute to the legitimacy process. Evidence provided
allows developing a better understanding of the different dimensions of organisational
legitimacy, and establishing key mechanisms and constituencies involved in the legitimation
process.
As illustrated in this chapter, the charities in the sample interact with multiple constituent
groups including service users, customers, partners, referral agencies, regulators, funders,
local community, and wider society. In these interactions they seek to legitimise with these
groups and secure their approval, endorsement, or support.
All the charities have diversified funding streams but have different perceptions of what
should constitute their funding portfolio. The findings have shown that funding decisions tend
to be underpinned by the CEOs’ professional beliefs and experiences. DST puts a higher
emphasis on SE activities, APT seeks a more balanced funding mix, ETR emphasizes grants and
SE income, and TSS focuses on grants and service level agreements.
APT, DST and ETR seek to legitimise with their customers by matching the standards of similar
offers from commercial entities. For example, the ETR’ hostel has all the characteristics of a
typical tourist accommodation such as the booking link and a website, and related guest
services.
The findings suggest that the charities in the sample aim to keep pace with the changes that
occur locally and globally. They consider the needs of the local area and seek to identify and
fill gaps in local provision. TSS, for example, delivers services that none of the other
organisations in the area offer. Wider societal concerns were also shown to have implications
for charities. The impact of the Covid pandemic has created new needs and all four charities
responded with adapted services with a focus on servicing these new needs.
Internal organisational procedures have also been shown to play an important role in the
legitimation process. These systems and procedures allow for the collection of various data
about their performance that they subsequently use in their reporting to the charity
regulator, funders, and other external audiences. Service delivery processes are structured
151



around the user needs as to secure their engagement and participation. DST and APT, for
example, clearly emphasize their distinctiveness from schools and the privacy that their young
people can get. To enhance the services for the user and benefit from each other’s expertise,
the charities form partnerships with other like-minded organisations. Partnerships can also
be linked to strategic development, joint funding bids, growing profile, or influence.
The charities were found to act selectively when seeking funding. The case study
organisations have shown the need to research and understand the funder’s interests prior
to applying. The charities emphasise the importance of communicating the fit in writing.
Importantly, the findings have shown how the charities use evidence obtained elsewhere to
legitimise with their funders. These include feedback from the service users and other
stakeholders, referral agencies and the local community. The charities use their SE activities
to support their funding applications. Changes in the society, local community and policies
create new needs and if spotted and absorbed allow the charities to evolve and develop new
projects that might be attractive to a funder to fund.
The next chapter presents the findings as they relate to the funders of the case study
organisations.

152



CHAPTER 5: FINDINGS PART II. LEGITIMACY FROM THE
PERSPECTIVE OF FUNDERS

Chapter overview
Chapter four outlined the processes that underpin organisational legitimacy of the case study
organisations. Overall, 15 funding bodies were included in the study and 18 interviews with
funding officers and fund managers were carried out. The findings reported in this chapter
are also based on the analysis of 15 funding application forms, 15 annual reports and financial
statements, six strategic plans and 13 websites of the funding institutions. The details of the
funders linked with specific case study organisations were provided in Table 3.5 in the
methodology chapter. For confidentiality reasons, all the names have been anonymised. This
chapter first presents the key characteristics of the funding institutions. It then outlines the
funders’ definitions of legitimacy and the processes that they use to establish it. It then
continues by presenting the funders’ perceptions of organisational legitimacy of the case
study organisations and comparing them on the key dimensions mentioned by the funders.
The chapter concludes by reflecting on the main themes emerging and their implications for
this study.

5.1 Who are the funders?
The funders in the sample differ in several respects. Six were set up by individuals and
individual families, five by public bodies, two by charities, and two by private companies
(more detailed information is included in Appendix 5). The funders differ by their
organisational type and the source of their funds (Table 5.1.). Despite that, there is some
correlation between the two characteristics. The four trusts in the sample tend to administer
private funds and distribute dividend or investment income earned on the capital donated by
an individual, local councils allocate local government funding while most of the funders (8)
operate with a form of public income raised directly from the public or channelled by state
agencies.

153



Table 5.1 Details of funders' financial models by organisational type
Funder
F1

Constitutional Form
Company limited by guarantee (CLG)
and registered charity

Source of Funds
Public donations via annual public fundraising events

F2

Local council

East Lothian Council’s devolved budget

F3

CLG and registered Scottish charity

Private sector (individual philanthropists, other trusts and
foundations, and corporate organisations)

F4

CLG and registered Scottish charity

Individuals, trusts and foundations, Scottish Government
and local authorities

F5

Public sector organization

The Council’s devolved budget

F6

CLG and registered charity

The revenue generated through the players of a lottery

F7

Local council

The Council’s devolved budget

F8

CLG and registered charity

Member’s donations and surplus funds from the parent
company

F9

Trust

Income from properties rental gifted by the founder and
his family

F10

Trust

Dividend and interest income from capital value donated
by the founder

F11

Non-departmental public body

Revenue generated through the players of a lottery

F12

Trust

The founder’s shares in the family business and continued
contributions of the wider family

F13

Trust

Dividends from the controlling shareholding in a private
company (Edrington) donated by the family

F14

CLG and a registered charity

The Scottish Government

F15

Public sector organization

The Scottish Government and the Program’s funds

Source: annual reports and websites of the funding institutions

Each funder has a funding focus that they variously refer to as funding themes, priorities, or
programs. These could be, for example, tackling mental health issues (F1), improving life skills,
education, and employability (F3) or addressing deprivation, poverty, and inequality (F12).
The funding themes are not fixed, and almost all the funders periodically review them. For
example, F1 performs a strategic review of the funding themes every five years. Others do
not have a set period and the timing of the review is at the discretion of the trustees (e.g.,
F12) or when the funds are exhausted (e.g., F4). The funders explain that the review process
is driven by “big developments” (Strategic Plan, F7) such as racial equality and climate change
(F1), most pressing social issues (F4), and SDGs (F6). The change in funding themes reflects an
aspiration to “fit with how the charity sector is evolving” (F8) and stay relevant:
154



We recognise that the world around us is changing at an unprecedented pace, and
that in order for us to be of most use in this evolving landscape, we need to consider
our role. (Strategic Plan, F14)
Only one funder, F10 claimed that the themes have remained relatively stable, but for others
the changes were rather substantial to the extent that they required amendments to the Trust
Deed to ensure that “[the founder’s] wishes in the original deed were articulated in a modern
context” (Annual Report, F9). Other funders may consult with stakeholders, commission a
piece of research and benchmarking against other funders:
We would look at existing grant holders. We would be looking at our connections with
other funders. We would be looking at SCVO, other third sector agencies, and, you know,
local authorities, Scottish government, where they're supporting the funding. So that
sort of landscape in terms of where are gaps and who's funding what already. (F14)

5.2 Defining legitimacy
The funders have described legitimacy of TSOs in a variety of ways (Table 5.1). These
descriptions included organisational characteristics as well as behaviours and even values.
Most often legitimate organisations were associated with trust and credibility. Legitimate
organisations were “genuine”, “merited”, “right”, “authentic”, “realistic”, “transparent” and
“safe”. They had a cohesion with the funder’s priorities and demonstrated that they could
meet them. “We will not give you £200,000 because we do not know you” (F11), or on the
contrary “we know them, so we have comfort with that” (F12) suggesting that funding,
legitimacy, and trust are closely interlinked. The definitions proposed by the funders in Table
5.1 imply that legitimacy of an organisation is established in the funding application process,
which some of them call due diligence:
For us each of the organisations that we work with the legitimacy of the organisation is
about the due diligence that we do around the construct of the organisation first and
foremost. (F2)

155



Table 5.2 Funders’ definitions of legitimacy
Funder
F1

Legitimacy
trust, realistic, safe

Illustrative Quotes
Ultimately it is trust based, but we try and ensure that we have
enough due diligence processes in place to reassure ourselves.

F2

legal, have a cohesion to our
own agendas, credibility

The legitimacy of the organisation is about the due diligence
that we do around the construct of the organisation […]

F3

fits with the priorities, really
identified the need, realistic

In the first instance is how strongly it fits with the overall
priorities of the fund. If it does, it goes for assessment.

F4

right, robust, merited, be in
good faith

You make sure you're choosing the right entities in terms of
due diligence and how application processes are followed.

F5

not different from our concept

We need to see what their concept is to make sure it is not
different from our concept.

F6

Trust

[…] we put a lot of trust into these groups. […] but we trust our
processes […] to catch that.

F7

trust, true partnership, right

We've got data that the partnership is right and the trust can
be there.

F8

demonstrate the need and
impact, be within our program
areas
trust, relationship

It will really demonstrate the need for their project and that it
impacts people who fall within our program areas.

F9

[…] we've built up that relationship with them. We have
comfort in that as well. But we still do all the same governance
checks and everything.
They meet the criteria set by the person who set up the trust.

F10

meet the criteria, realistic,
effective

F11

meets outcomes, achievable,
credible

We want to know whether it meets outcomes. […] the people
are making great claims, we don't just take that on face value.

F12

trust

It is about trust.

F13

genuine

When they say they're working with disadvantaged young
people, those are genuine.

F14

safe pair of hands, robust,
transparent

[…] they are a safe pair of hands that will turn things around
quickly for you.

F15

not to have 100,000 job,
transparent

They have all the required things in place.

Establishing legitimacy of an organisation in the assessment process helps the funders justify
that “the money is well spent” (F1) to the donors, who may have different profiles. For
example, public bodies are held accountable for public funds and must evidence that they

156



deliver best possible value and achieve set outcomes “because of the scrutiny” (F2) that they
face. So are other publicly funded organisations:
We do our due diligence process to make sure that we're funding legitimate
organisations because at the end of the day the funds that are going out of the door are
raised by [individuals] so they are stakeholders. So, we need to make sure they have a
100 percent faith in us distributing that funding. (F6)
The trusts that were set up by an individual claim not to have the same level of public
accountability, but they still ensure that they fulfil the obligations and aims set by the founder:
[We must] make sure that we do everything legally, according to the articles of the trust,
which we are obliged to follow and we're meeting the aims of the trust as set down by
[the founder]. (F10)

5.3 Funding application assessment process
All TSOs are required to submit a funding application and include supporting documentation.
All the funders require a governance document such as a constitution or memorandum and
Articles of Association, audited financial statements, and relevant policies set individually by
each funder. Other information may be requested such as bank account details (F11),
management accounts (F1), research and reports (F2), organisational structure chart (F12),
and details of referees (F6).
Application assessment process might be time consuming and involves collecting vast
amounts of information about the organisation (for a full overview of the application
requirements and decision-making process please see Appendix 13). The funders’ decisionmaking process varies from funder to funder but is usually a 3-stage process. In the first stage,
an application is evaluated by a funding officer followed by a peer review. The next step will
depend on the size and capacity of the funder. For larger funders upon passing an initial
review of the funding officer, the application is passed on to a team, which is usually made up
of funding officers and the funding manager who give it another closer look. If successful, the
application is then sent to a decision-making committee where the Board makes final
decisions. For smaller funders, the application may be sent directly to the Board, but equally
the decision is not made by a single individual. This helps them ensure the application receives
support from a group of people who make a collective judgement:
157



If I've got something wrong, my colleagues can correct me, and if my team does
something wrong, the committee can correct my team. So when something does get
funded, there's at least 10 people in the organisation supporting it, and the same with
applications that are unsuccessful. It's generally because the group feel that it shouldn't
be recommended for funding. It's not just one person saying, “I don't like this
application”. (F11)
To promote further transparency and fairness, the make-up of decisions-making teams can
be diverse and involve individuals with expertise in the issue and members from the
community. For example, F3 involves members of the community council and the wider
community. F14 includes beneficiaries or people with lived experience. This way, the
decisions can be made by a diverse group of people from both within and outside the
organisation. According to the funders, this improves their decision-making and promotes a
better distribution of funds:
I remember reading bids once and, in my mind, I thought there was some really clear
decisions about which projects should get funded, and which shouldn't. But when I went
to the assessment panel, they almost turned it around on its head. So sometimes when
you read the application, the information you have in there is limited, and that's where
having the local knowledge can really bring life to those proposals. The locals are
assessors and none of them will lie. (F14)

5.4 The funders’ perceptions of case study organisations
The section draws on 18 interviews with the funding officers and program managers. In most
cases, they had direct knowledge about the organisation because they were engaged in the
assessment process. F6 and F9 provided general information about their engagement with
the organisations because the particular funding officers who were interviewed either were
not involved into the assessment process of that particular organisation or had confidentiality
clauses. The data is presented across six dimensions identified during the coding process.
These dimensions are Organisational mission, Evidence of the need, Project, Capacity to
deliver, Organisational procedures, and Other considerations.

158



5.4.1 The funders’ perceptions of TSS’ legitimacy
Organisational mission
Six funders were surveyed in relation to TSS. F2 described TSS as having a passion for young
people and wanting to make a difference to the young people's lives in a positive way. They
“do a fantastic job” (F6) and are a “friend and part of what we do” (F4). F2, F4 and F5 also
claimed to have good personal relationships with the CEO.
The location of TSS seemed to play an important role for the funders because it was
mentioned by three of them. Two of these are locally based funders. The third funder was
attracted by the TSS’ clear geographical focus:
They are a very well centred organisation in terms of […] they're very geographically
focused on where they're trying to work and the types of people they work with. So
there's nothing but positives about any charity that does that. (F4)
TSS works with the young people at risk of being excluded from school or not in education,
employment, or training, and five funders suggested that TSS’ delivered benefits that they
were looking to achieve with their funds:
A lot of these young adults have experienced a lot of trauma in the life, and have not got
a lot. With Covid, [this project] could enhance their digital skills. It links in with our area
plan in terms of reducing inequalities. (F5)
Evidence of the need
According to all the funders, TSS thoroughly considered the beneficiaries and the needs of
them, which helped influence the decision to support the organisation. They provided a clear
description of the types of the young people who needed support and evidenced the need
using data and stats to show that there were marginalized young people in Midlothian and
East Lothian who needed help:
They work with disadvantaged young people, and they work in an area where there was
a lot of disadvantaged young people, so they could reach their target market. […] they
provided a lot of data and stats to demonstrate the quality of their work. (F8)

159



F2 and F8 commented that TSS identified the need from their work with the young people
and an understanding of the new issues caused by the Covid-19 pandemic, and therefore,
they viewed it as addressing the needs of the community:
TSS see the young people, they can identify the issues and the problems that are coming
through on a daily basis. With Covid, […] it’s meeting the needs of the wider community,
they are going to use this to gain more skills, etc. (F5)
Project
Five funders felt the activities that TSS proposed were appropriate for addressing the need
and noted that TSS offers tailored support and a comprehensive package of services from
emotional well-being support to rehousing. F2 emphasized that the level of intervention is
determined in conversations with other stakeholders relevant to the young person (e.g.,
police, social work, etc.), and F4 highlighted the great care with which TSS handles each of
their young people:
In some cases, they had young people who were exclusively caring for elderly relatives,
in some cases abusive relatives. Completely different set of barriers to progressing their
lives. They handle each of their young people as almost like a case file, and they have a
very clear picture of how they work with them depending on their profile. (F4)
Capacity to deliver
Track record. Five funders highlighted the fact that TSS is a well-established organisation with
a proven track record, which they interpreted as an indicator of competence and experience:
We've been working with TSS for some time. We know their work. They have previously
been successful with the funding that we had given them and met their targets and
outcomes. […] when the next application comes in we've got that comfort that they've
spent the grant that we've provided them previously well. (F9)
Four funders have worked closely with TSS on other initiatives and stated that they have
developed trusted relationships with TSS:
I know TSS quite well. They've got credibility. They’ve proven that they can and do really
great work. They're very experienced, they're good role models in the sector. (F2)

160



Skills. Four funders highlighted the high calibre and professionalism of the staff. F2, for
example, stated that the professionalism is evidenced by the trusted conversations that TSS
has about the young person with the police, and education and health sectors.
Networks/collaborations. Three funders have also mentioned established referral routes with
the local schools, children's social work services and GPs, and the networks linking TSS with
other key stakeholders:
They are working with peers in the police, in social work, in education, in health. They
do that in a very professionally collaborative way. (F2)
Organisational procedures
Governance. The funders tended to emphasize the professionalism of TSS, for example, by
the presence of strong safeguarding policies and reporting mechanisms (F2, F5) and a focused
approach in supporting the beneficiaries (F4):
A lot of our third sector partner organisations don't really know the charitable laws, the
governance obligations. That sort of nuts and bolts of being an effectively functioning
charitable organisation takes a bit of time and energy. So the TSS project are a bit of a
shining light. (F2)
F4 also helped TSS set up a new accounting system because “if they are operating better, they
will deliver better” (F4).
Finance. F2 and F8 defined TSS as sustainable, and they both defined sustainability in similar
ways. F2 said that TSS had sustainability because they have survived for a number of years
and were successful at finding other funding streams. F8 pointed to their strong financial
position, other outstanding funding applications at the time of applying, and their ability to
sustain their work over the years.
Other considerations
According to the funders, the funding they gave to TSS was dependent on their fit with the
funding programs.
F2 views TSS as an essential core part of the education and children's services functions in the
area and the service might disappear if not funded:

161



What would we do if we didn't have it? How would we support those young people if we
didn't have TSS? I think my education and children's services colleagues would hang their
heads and really worry if we didn't have it. (F2)
However, when asked about the possibility of a service level agreement with TSS, the funder
expressed concerns that this would compromise TSS because it invites other organisations to
the area and “that's a big competing to provide a service”.
F4 is no longer funding TSS because the criteria for a new fund have changed. F5 believes that
having a connection with TSS is beneficial because they can refer to TSS but also through their
work learn about the issues and new needs in the area.
Summary
In summary, the funders describe TSS as a highly professional organisation delivering
professional services. It has demonstrated robust governance and has been successful in
securing support of a diverse set of funders. The funders tended to emphasize their focused
work in the area that they saw as “narrow” (F4), “marginalised” (F8) or where they “don't
have many youth-based third sector organisations” (F2). In their applications TSS justified the
need using data, stats, and their own experience. They offer tailored support and can support
young people in several ways. TSS is a well-networked organisation and does partnership
work with other organisations. The fit with the funding themes was an important criterion to
fund TSS, while other considerations were learning more about the need from TSS and the
lack of other organisations who can offer a comparable service.

5.4.2 The funders’ perceptions of DST’s legitimacy
Organisational mission
Of the seven organisations that were surveyed in relation to DST, six provided financial
support, and two provided both financial support and in-kind financial support (e.g., access
to its pro-bono network). In addition, the interview was conducted with one of the partners
(PAR), a national charity with a focus on bringing different organisations to work on joint
projects. Five of the funders have a history of funding DST.
All the funders of DST share a view that DST’s fundamental mission is to support the young
people and that there is a high cohesion between their aims and what DST does:
162



It's trying to help young people move into a better space and move into a better place.
And that's the attraction to us. (F12)
The funders expressed their willingness to offer ongoing support to DST because DST is “doing
very good work” (F10) and because DST fit with their aims. Four funders suggested that DST
fills an important gap in the provision of services for young people by giving them
opportunities that they would not otherwise have had such as access to affordable leisure,
advanced technologies, and training opportunities. DST “have added massively to the
facilities for young people” (F4), are “giving people a destination” (F3) and are “terrific at
helping these people” (F10). Six funders suggested that the reason for supporting DST is their
good engagement with young people and success that they had with them:
Young people are valuing what they're getting on. They seem to turn up in big numbers.
And that to me is the best barometer. If an organisation is doing something that attracts
young people to come on a voluntary basis, then they're doing something right. (F14)
Evidence of the need
According to F4, the dance project with which DST applied to them was endorsed by the
teachers from the local school. The school had witnessed the suicides of two young people
and a growing number of school dropouts and believed that dance was an effective tool to
re-engage the young people:
The head teacher was in attendance […]. She said, I'll tell you, we have tried everything,
we've tried psychological counselling, we've tried teacher counselling. The only thing
that has worked with these young people when that happened is when we said they can
come here to go to a dance session and for two or three hours, they just lose themselves
and dance. (F4)
Building on their initial success, the work of the organisation has started to get traction and
get noticed. This was important for F14 who uses a peer assessment model to distribute
funds. The local assessors who evaluated DST’s application were aware of the positive
outcomes it was generating for the young people.

163



Project
Six out of seven funders emphasised the role of the service delivery model of DST in engaging
the young people and suggested that it had an influence on their decision to fund the
organisation. DST have a good understanding of the young people because “they are not
planning things that young people do not want” (F14) and propose interesting projects:
It was a great idea. What you need to do is find something that young people can lose
themselves in so that they can recover from whatever's happened to them. But you've
got to provide that escapism if you like to allow them to heal. (F4)
Their model is “not just treating a single issue” (F3) but addresses multiple needs. DST provide
training opportunities, qualifications, and family counselling sessions. They use football,
dance, roller hockey and VR, and the funders believe the nature of activities is good for mental
and physical health, forming friendships, and building self-confidence. These activities are a
good hook that DST uses to engage the young people in other activities:
Now most young people would think that was just a gaming centre. I always thought
that was very clever. Every child likes that, every young person, so bring them into the
place through that, and then there’re other things that may come from it because there's
very few young people that wouldn't love to just play in there. It's a good hook. (F12)
Four funders have also emphasised that the services at DST continuously develop, and new
initiatives and projects are being proposed. Moreover, F12 and F14 describe DST’s premises
as safe for the young people because the local community actively use the facilities as well.
Yet, it is “a sign of a successful organisation when you see that engagement from their local
community” (F14).
Capacity to deliver
Networks/Collaborations. Four funders commented on the networks of DST that in addition
to the local schools included links with the local council, the police, and other organisations
with whom DST ran collaborative projects. Due to their focus on collaboration, they can bring
a fresh look to the work that they do:

164



The thing I particularly like about DST is they actually bring in different partners, it's not
always just your traditional youthwork. But you know, they are always bringing in a bit
of a new angle to it. That's what makes them stand out. (F14)
Skills. The one feature that stands out in relation to DST in comparison to other organisations
is the role of the CEO, who is also the founder of DST and its Chair. All the funders describe
him as highly credible and trustworthy, and highlight his leadership skills:
Above all, it's the quality of leadership. The people in the Trust are very impressed with
[CEO]. We have a very high regard for [CEO] who is a bundle of energy and he has had
a number of initiatives in the city. (F10)
Oftentimes DST was described in terms of what the CEO has done. It is not DST-theorganisation that was being discussed but DST-the-leader, and the organisational
characteristics of DST that the funders have found to be important are closely linked to the
profile of the CEO, his personal characteristics, and achievements. For example, “his aims very
much fit in with what we are trying to do” (F3), “he helps with so many other things in the
city” (F12) and “he had a track record of really strong results” (F15). In this sense, it is the aims
of the CEO that the funders have found alignment with, the networks of the CEO, and his track
record in the delivery of similar projects that the funders tended to discuss more in relation
to DST:
It's an incredibly successful organisation. They've just grown out of all recognition way,
way past than anything that we could have expected, which is largely down to [CEO]
and the fact that he has an influence with the local council and with the police, etc. [F4]
Track record. The funders once again attributed the track record of DST to the CEO, and his
reputation was a key factor for supporting DST for all the funders:
[CEO] has got a very good track record. So that's very important. He's got good ideas
and he delivers. And he's been terrific at helping these people. (F10)
Organisational procedures
Governance. In terms of the governance, only F15 explicitly mentioned that DST had a board
with diverse set of skills and was transparent. Five funders did mention the high quality of
reporting and that they get information that they need to evaluate success:

165



Their reporting has always been good. [CEO] always reports on time. He's really, really
good at that. (F14)
Finance. Six funders felt the organisation was sustainable because of their focus on own
income generation and SE activities. F12 and F14 stated that DST is different in that sense
because they only apply if there is a real need for external funding, and they do not rely on
external financing to the same extent as other organisations:
The sustainability is a really strong factor because there is many organisations, “funding
junkies”, that completely rely on funding all the time. [CEO] was very different. He had
come along and just said, “We could deliver this for you.” (F15)
Other considerations
Most of these additional considerations have to do with the funder’s self-interest. F3, F12,
F14, and F15 suggested the benefits that they could get by demonstrating the impact of their
funds to others:
I know we'll do it, and it will be a showcase to the world of what you can do. (PAR)
Other reasons included access to DST’s network (F12), the high effectiveness and relatively
low costs of the model compared to other interventions (F4), a possibility for a quick return
because DST “will turn things around quickly for you” (F14) and a general preference for SEs
(F3).
Summary
In summary, DST was able to meet all the funders’ major criteria. It showed fit with the
funders’ aims. The need for the projects was confirmed by the schools and their work was
endorsed by other local assessors. The funders emphasized the service delivery model, which
proved to be very effective at engaging the young people. DST was praised for its ability to
network with others, propose new projects and achieve positive outcomes for the young
people all underpinned by the strong leadership and governance skills of the CEO. His
personal track record added credibility to the work of DST, and his focus on achieving
sustainability made DST look different from others.

166



5.4.3 The funders’ perceptions of APT’s legitimacy
Organisational mission
Four funders were interviewed with respect to APT. All the funders of APT have funded it
before. F13, for example, has been funding APT since 2004. They claim to have trusted and
open relationships with APT and believe that “they are there for a genuine reason”. The
application for F1 was assessed by a local assessor with the background in mental health, and
it was concluded that “APT's experience of doing this type of work was good”. F7 believes
that there is a “true partnership with APT” and is finding working with them easy. According
to F9, APT does good work with young people.
All four funders agreed that APT fitted the aims of their fund:
What they were looking to do really fitted nicely with the outcomes that we were looking
for and the type of partnership work that we're also looking for in the project. (F1)
The funders believed that an individual package of support developed for a young person
reflected their needs and was effective at supporting “a very targeted group of beneficiaries”
(F13) with which APT was working, which include trauma experienced or care experienced
young people, young people with mental health issues and addiction, and young people who
have disengaged from education:
Often APT are able to provide a very bespoke purpose driven package of support. A lot
of our young people who attend APT are trauma experienced. So that connection with a
living being, that's not a human necessarily is really important for their well-being. (F7)
F7 suggested that the young people “always turn up to attend APT and engage really well with
APT.” They can quantify the high number of children who have gone through their service and
the positive outcomes associated with it while F1 and F13 used the high volume of referrals
to gauge the benefits that APT was delivering:
[…] the numbers of young people that they're working through demonstrate […] there
was somebody on the waiting list who needed support. (F13)
Evidence of the need
In relation to APT, it was common among the funders to comment on how APT used their
knowledge learned from experience to justify the need. F1 found the project attractive
167



because in their new project for the funder they included a counsellor to work with the young
people. F13 noted the widening of the support to the whole family rather than focusing
exclusively on the young person. F7 was attracted by a newly developed package of
qualifications that APT specifically designed for schools. The funder commented that the
project “fills a gap of identified need” for the schools who have growing evidence of trauma
experienced children due to Covid. These projects have demonstrated that APT have been
continuously expanding the scope of their activities based on experience and shown that their
skills and experience within their area “grew, grew and grew” (F13).
Project
Often, much of the funders’ discussion was focussed on their interest in the service delivery
model of APT because “one of the greatest assets of APT is that they really epitomise outdoor
learning” (F7). The use of equine therapy and the involvement of horses was perceived to be
different, and the funders tended to highlight APT’s unique approach in tackling mental health
issues:
We felt APT was particularly interesting because they use the equine therapy, which
stood out. You know, the approach seemed very suitable for mental health around the
kind of the activity itself. So riding a horse. It's different. It's like an individual activity. So
we see the value of individual activities to support mental health. And tailoring the
support for the young people was really important. (F1)
Capacity to Deliver
Networks/Collaborations. APT was perceived to be open to partnership working, and F1
suggested that collaborations are preferred in areas such as mental health, and thus the
involvement of the counsellor had an added value. The networks and referral pathways that
they have created with key partners in social work, CAMHS, local authority, criminal justice
teams, and others served to demonstrate their credibility and the value of the services to the
community:
In terms of the referral pathways that they've created with key partners, that really
demonstrates how targeted their service is. The fact that they have these pathways
really shows that when they say they're working with disengaged young people with

168



particular barriers, you know those are genuine because of the volume of referrals that
shows how much they're valued by those services. So that's a big tick. (F13)
Skills. Another characteristic that the funders tended to emphasize in relation to APT is their
unique skill set and experience in bringing together highly specialised areas of expertise, i.e.,
horse-riding, equine therapy, and work around trauma. F1, for example, suggested that the
equine therapy made it “quite a sophisticated model”, which nevertheless was easy for APT
to implement. F7 added that all staff at APT have background in several areas:
They have really high-quality staff who understand children and understand trauma and
are actually able to relate with their skills and experience very well mostly to the children
that we commission them for. (F7)
Track Record. As was mentioned previously, all the funders have a history of funding APT and
have evidence of the impact of its past projects. They found it attractive that the APT’s
projects were grounded in the area that they had experience in. F13, for example, invited APT
to apply for continuation funding based on its previous track record and because they were
able to demonstrate the impact of the services. F7 have had a number of funding
arrangements with APT in the past, and accumulated evidence of its impact:
We’ve worked with them for so many years. […] they meet the required outcomes for
our children and young people. So we've got data there actually that confirm for me the
partnership is right and the service can be continued to be commissioned. (F7)
Organisational procedures
Governance. There were no direct references to the governance of APT.
Finance. Only F1 commented on the funding mix saying that the funding that APT had from
other established third sector funders helped them see that other people were interested in
their work and were finding it successful, and, therefore, APT clearly knew what they were
doing.
Other considerations
According to F1, they were intrigued by the equine therapy element of the project and wanted
to learn how it can support mental health. Yet, APT can be used in fundraising campaigns of
the funder to showcase the impact achieved through the projects that they fund:
169



Selfishly, part of our remit really is to have nice stories that we can tell to the public to
encourage them to give us some money. And, you know, something like APT is a real that's real potential on that front actually. (F1)
F13 is willing to offer ongoing funding support to APT and has not suggested any reservations
except for when APT must take a 12-month break before they can apply again.
F7 claims to have a limited budget and is uncertain about what their next year budget will be,
and therefore, have refrained from committing any long-term funding for APT. However, they
are interested in continued partnership working with APT:
At the moment I'm confident that APT for me is the only charity that I think can meet
the needs of our children in that particular way for that particular location in Borders.
(F7)
Summary
In summary, the funders perceived APT as an established organisation with a proven track
record. All the funders have a history of funding APT, and the organisation showed fit with
the funders’ priorities. They evidenced the need with their experience and showed the value
of their services. They are open to partnership working and have the support from the
community and the young people. They have proved their competence, but what was
attractive for the funders is their service delivery model, unique skill set and experience in
this type of work. Yet, there were a few other considerations that were pragmatic in nature.
These were “storytelling” to encourage public donations, learning about equine therapy, and
achieving objectives as part of the funders’ professional remit.

5.4.4 The funders’ perceptions of ETR’s legitimacy
Organisational mission
Six funders were interviewed with respect to ETR. The funders agreed that ETR exists to
support the young people in Callander and that they “do good work” (F9). F4, for example,
described it as “one of the best organisations in Scotland” that they would like to continue
the connection with while for F3 ETR is an “amazing organisation that [they] absolutely love.”
When discussing ETR, the funders tended to make multiple references to the location of the
organisation. Three funders stated that ETR was selected because of the issues the young
170



people experience in a rural area. F13 elaborated that the need for the project was justified
by the lack of accessible services in the area and how these may lead to issues such as mental
health, school dropouts, and the heightened risk of offending:
It's a small touristy village. They would be heavily impacted by the pandemic. A lot of
the employment is seasonal, it's low paid. In rural areas it's only a bus…what…every two
hours or something. If you don't have a car, you're really very isolated. [F13]
All the funders suggested that ETR fit their criteria. ETR provides “really good resources” (F3)
for the young people who may experience multiple issues caused by a feeling of isolation such
as mental health, challenging behaviours, and substance misuse, or have difficulties making
the transition from school to work. F4 suggested that ETR was selected on that basis. It offers
opportunities to develop work experience, get placements and obtain qualifications linked to
the need:
They had that kind of holistic approach where there was a quite clear correlation
between the identified issues and what they were delivering and how that would impact
on overall outcomes for these young people. (F13)
Evidence of the need
Four funders stated that the beneficiaries have been well considered and that the ETR’s
application was addressing a local need that they had identified via consultations with the
community and the young people. F6 suggested that “making it a bit about beneficiaries” and
including them as part of the application, it was easy for them to appreciate how ETR
supported the community and enabled the user participation in the proposed activities.
Project
The example of ETR and their experience with F4 has brought to the fore the importance of
the proposed activity in achieving positive outcomes for the young people. According to F4,
they approved the “wrong program” because when the project began, the young people were
not interested in the proposed activities which at the time were learning farming, forestry,
and other rural skills. The funder held consultations with the young people, board members,
and the school to explore the type of activities that would be of interest to the young people
and benefit the area, too. These conversations led to the set-up of their youth hostel. The
hostel matched the needs because the training opportunities and other activities in the hostel
171



were attractive for the young people, and it was beneficial for the local community that lived
off tourism:
What ETR now has, in terms of the community, is a great place for young people to
gather on an evening of a weekend, they've got the cafe, they've got the rooms and it's
great for local employers because they are trained. They are a great example of young
people that really want to learn and participate in community. (F4)
Capacity to Deliver
Networks/Collaborations. Four funders have also noted the links of ETR with the high school
and further education providers. According to them, it helped them see how the young
people progress through stages, i.e., from the initial referral to obtaining qualifications,
placements opportunities or work experience:
If ETR didn't have the partnerships with the school and the presence in the school, that
would have made it a much weaker application if they didn't have the connections to
the further education and work experience. (F13)
Track record. All the funders have funded ETR before, and, therefore, have evidence of their
past performance, “good track record” (F9) and “good reputation” (F11). Interestingly, when
ETR first approached F11, the 30 years of their operational history served as an indicator of
their credibility and success:
When an established organisation comes in to you for the first time, you can have some
confidence that they know what they're doing, that it's not a fraudulent application, and
that the project will be a success. That was the thing we had with ETR. (F11)
Organisational procedures
Governance. The governance was not directly discussed. Only F3 mentioned the quality of
ETR’s reporting in that they supply the funder with the information allowing the funder “to
evaluate the success.” It might mean that governance was not of concern most likely because
F4 who was heavily involved with the organisation between 2008-2018 helped ETR set up
financial processes, and upskill the staff in account management, reporting, and hotel
management, which helped strengthen the organisation but also manage their public profile:
The problem with running a hostel is that you've got all sorts of risks as far as young
172



people are concerned because there's a lot of cash lying about. You've got to be careful
that you know there are fraud policies in and stuff like that. My nightmare was always
that the young people would get involved with the drink […] and the Stirling Observer
saying, “This is appalling.” (F4)
Finance. Four funders were attracted by the SE approach of ETR and the fact that the hostel
was a source of income for the charity. Yet, F13 described ETR as a robust organisation
because they had support of other funders who are known to have rigorous selection
processes, which the funder interpreted as a “quality seal”.
Other considerations
When asked about their motivations to fund ETR, the funders claimed that ETR fit their
criteria, but interestingly they presented situations that would prevent them from funding
ETR. F3, for example, suggested that a proven track record does not always guarantee funding
because organisations must first and foremost match the priorities set by the donor:
I think probably opportunistically, they fitted programs that we've had. We do get really
amazing organisations that we love but because we don't hold any of our own funding,
we can't always support where we want to. We do have funders, who, very
unfortunately, have a priority. (F3)
F4 in turn believed that their work with ETR finished because ETR no longer needed their
support and were “absolutely secure.” F11 makes decisions based on the amount of previous
funding received by an organisation, and prioritises new applicants:
We'd look at how much funding they had in the past and whether we think they should
be going to other places in future. (F11)
Summary
The long organisational history, track record, and established networks added credibility to
the work ETR was doing while the involvement of the community into the development of
the project ensured it was relevant to their needs. The location of ETR was a key factor for
the funders, and the characteristics of the area were used to justify the need. ETR supports
the young people who feel isolated and addresses the needs of the tourism-oriented, rural
area. ETR has strong relationships with the local high school and is linked with others to

173



deliver training. ETR is well governed and is supported by other large funders. It does not
depend on a single funding source and generates own income through its SE. Organisational
characteristics such as good reputation and track record do not guarantee funding, however,
and fit with the funding themes remains crucial.

5.5 Comparisons of cases
A comparison of the funders’ perceptions of the case study organisations is provided in Table
5.2. All the organisations were perceived positively by the funders. They were described as
well-established and well-run organisations that have proven value of their work and have a
genuine purpose to support young people. In addition to their missions, the funders of ETR
and TSS noted their location. Both organisations serve the young people in a narrow
geographic area where young people experience lack of opportunities. ETR made a stronger
links to the needs of the area by emphasizing its rurality and tourism as the key features of
the area.
All the funders suggested that the organisations were funded because they fulfilled their
criteria and showed fit with the funding themes. These themes were individual to the funders,
but the organisations were able to link the benefits they expected from the projects with the
aims of the fund. The equine therapy of APT is effectively tackling mental health issues. ETR’s
hostel is used as a place to train the young people in skills needed in the area. TSS does not
have one single speciality and offers a range of support from mental health to housing and
employment. Using dance and sport DST diverts the young people away from engaging into
criminal activities, and these activities are good for physical and mental health. Of all the
criteria, the fit with the funding themes was found to be key because an organisation may
have a good track record, be respected and well-governed but the lack of fit with the funding
themes may compromise its chances to receive funding.
All the organisations were able to evidence the need but used different sources. ETR
consulted with the community and included the views of young people in their project
planning and linked their needs with the needs of the area. Both APT and TSS were perceived
by their funders as experienced organisations and as such their knowledge and previous work
were used as evidence of the need. In turn, when DST first started, they had no firm base and
were based in a “pretty draughty old hole” (F4), but “the young people were totally involved

174



in this dancing” (F4). Their work was endorsed by the stakeholders in the area who saw the
positive response of the young people to dance and other activities that DST was offering
(e.g., school, local assessors).
Table 5.3 Comparisons of ETR, APT, TSS and DST on key dimensions
Dimension
Mission

Area
Project
Evidence of the
need
Capacity to
deliver

ETR
Training and
employment

Rural, isolated, poor
area
Training and work at
the hostel
Consultations,
research
• Established track
record, reputation
• Organisational age
• Established
networks and
referral pathways

APT
Tackling mental
health, addiction,
trauma

Equine therapy,
horses
Previous work
• Established track
record
• Staff skills
• Established
networks and
referral pathways

TSS
Therapeutic work,
training
employment, or
housing
Focused
geographical area
Counselling and
skills development
Data and stats,
previous work
• Established track
record, reputation
• Organisational age
• High calibre,
professional staff
• Established
networks and
referral pathways

DST
Physical and mental
health, diversionary
activities

Dance, sport, and
tech
Local network
• Established track
record, reputation
• Personal track
record of the CEO
• Established
networks
Established
networks and
referral pathways

Governance

Well established
Received support
from F4

Well established

Effectively
functioning
charitable
organisation

Well-run

Finance

Social enterprise,
funded by large
charitable funders
Amount of funding
already received

Social enterprise,
funded by large
charitable funders
Potential to
promote the
funder’s charitable
cause and
objectives

Funded by large
charitable funders

Social enterprise

Lack of a
comparable service

Potential to
promote the
funder’s charitable
cause and
objectives

Other
considerations

The organisations demonstrated their competence, and their funders highlighted the long
track record of the organisations. The average age of the four charities is 30 years, and their
longevity served as an indicator of success and credibility. They have run successful projects
and were known to the funders via their previous work with them. DST is the youngest
organisation, but the CEO’s personal track record which he had already built prior to setting
up DST, was more important for the funders of DST.

175



Developed networks help identify “genuine” (F13) organisations because organisations
“parachuting into areas, delivering work and parachuting out again” (F14) do not build
relationships at a local level. Networks are also used as an indicator of value of the services
to their communities. The fact that they had established networks with referrals agencies was
important for all charities. DST’s networks were also used to show their competence, but
what their funders also noted about DST is that their networks continuously grow. They bring
in new partners, which “is not always just your traditional youthwork” (F14).
The role of skills as an indicator of competence was emphasized for APT, TSS and DST. APT
brought together expertise from two very different areas, youthwork and equine therapy,
and the staff had knowledge of both. TSS’ skills demonstrated their professionalism. In
relation to DST, the role of the CEO was highlighted by the funders who noted his leadership
and networking skills, and who found him “personally compelling” (F15), credible and
trustworthy.
The organisations have different service delivery models. All four work with the young people
on an individual basis although a small proportion of their work is group based. As the
example of ETR has shown, finding the right tool is critical. It must be “a good hook” (F12). Of
the four organisations, the service delivery models of APT and DST were particularly
emphasized by their funders and made them stand out. For APT, the use of animal therapy
made them unique in their work with the young people while dance and sport were seen as
highly effective at engaging the young people.
There were fewer references with respect to how the organisations are run. The funders only
highlighted that they are all well-established organisations. Of all the procedures, the funders
only noted the good reporting of all four. TSS was the only organisation where the high
governance’s standards were noted by their funders.
All four organisations were perceived to be in a good financial position. ETR, APT and DST
generate their own income via their SEs and were seen as financially sustainable. The funders
of DST in particular noted that DST does not rely on external financing to the same extent as
other organisations and “[CEO] only applies when he actually needs the money” (F14). TSS
differs from the rest in this respect from other organisations because they do not generate
their own income, but they have a diversified funders’ base.

176



Among other considerations that were mentioned by the funders were their more narrowly
defined self-interests. APT and DST appealed to their funders for their potential to attract the
attention to the causes supported by the funder and secure support of donors and other
stakeholders. The funders may sometimes be constrained in their choice because there are
few organisations that can meet their criteria. TSS is one of these organisations who operate
in a narrow geographic area. There is no similar provider who can offer a comparable service
in the area where it is based. While APT has a small focus area, too they face competition
from a large national charity that provides all the children’s services in the area.

177



Chapter summary
This chapter has provided further empirical evidence to address the research questions of this
study, which will be discussed in the next chapter. It has presented the key themes that
emerged in relation to the funding institutions and how they perceived legitimacy of each
case study organisation.
The findings have uncovered the diversity of the funding bodies in terms of origins, aims and
budgets, but several similarities were identified as well. First, legitimate organisations tend to
be associated with trust and credibility. Second, legitimacy is established in the assessment
of a funding application. Third, the assessment is done in stages and may include external
evaluators, so that eventually a collective judgement is made on the application.
From the perspective of the funders, all the case study organisations satisfied the funders’
criteria, and proved to be credible, genuine, and trusted. They fit the funding themes,
demonstrated collaborative work, competence, and capacity to deliver proposed projects,
had a good track record, and were in a stable financial position. Particular features of each
organisation were highlighted as well. ETR tended to be associated with its location, TSS was
highlighted for their professionalism and location, APT was described in terms of their service
delivery model and unique skills set of its staff, and DST for the novelty of their ideas, good
engagement with the young people and the leadership of its CEO.
Chapter 6 provides a discussion of the findings presented in this and the previous chapter. It
aims to address the research questions posed in this study and relate and place the discussion
within the extant literature.

178



CHAPTER 6: DISCUSSION

Chapter overview
The study aims to explore the legitimation process of TSOs and has three purposes: (1) explore
how TSOs define their organisational legitimacy and how they seek to legitimise (2)
understand the funders’ definitions of organisational legitimacy and (3) explore the
contingent factors influencing the legitimation process.
This chapter discusses the findings presented in the previous chapter. The discussion is based
on the integration of the relevant literatures on organisational legitimacy, non-profit
financing, and public service ecosystems. The chapter presents a reflection on the key themes
arising from the cases studies by contrasting them with the extant literature.
The study contributes to the non-profit literature in two major ways. First, the study suggests
that traditional models of legitimacy that focus on a dyadic relationship between the funder
and the TSO cannot account for the complexity of the legitimation process. Legitimation is
not just dyadic; it requires other processes to occur within an ecosystem composed of
individual and organisational actors, service delivery processes, institutional rules and norms,
and beliefs. The interactions of these elements shape the legitimation process, to which the
service user, the staff, and organisational networks are integral. The second contribution of
the study is that it shows that the ecosystem’s elements have varying degrees of legitimising
potential for the organisations. Consequently, there may be different models or approaches
towards legitimation inside the ecosystem. For every organisation there is a prime mover or
core element in the legitimation process to which other elements can be added like satellites.
Consequently, three models or approaches towards legitimation are proposed in the chapter.
Legitimation or the process through which legitimacy is achieved (Hybels, 1995; Maurer,
1971) is socio-political, imperfect, and boundedly rational (March and Simon, 1958), and both
the organisation and the legitimating environment will seek the information necessary to
correctly understand, interpret, and evaluate each other (Kostova and Zaheer, 1999). This
chapter divides the discussion of the findings outlined in the previous chapter into five
sections.
Section 6.1 will first outline the theoretical lens informed by the abductive reasoning
approach that guided this study. It will then explain how the original ecosystem framework
179



from the PAM literature was adapted in the study of TSO legitimacy. Section 6.2 will then
outline the elements and processes of legitimation of the four case study organisations using
the adapted ecosystem model. This will address the first research question. Section 6.3 will
explore the funding process from the perspective of the TSOs and complement the discussion
of organisational legitimacy of the case study organisations from the funders’ point of view.
This will address the second research question. Section 6.4 will then present the four
ecosystems of the case study organisations, discuss how they compare and identify the key
elements in their respective ecosystems. This will address the last research question. Section
6.5 will synthesise the previous three parts together and outline an over-arching framework
of organisational legitimacy of TSOs from the ecosystem perspective.

6.1 The adaptation of the ecosystem model
This section explains the theoretical lens that guided the study and provides the details of the
abductive reasoning process that shows how the original ecosystem framework was adapted
to the non-profit context.
The discussion in this chapter was informed by the public service ecosystems lens from the
PAM literature. Specifically, the study adopted the public ecosystem framework of Osborne
et al. (2022) and subsequently adapted it to the context of the third sector. The ecosystem
lens in the PAM literature has allowed the researchers to shift the focus from studying dyadic
relationships and models to consider a wider set of factors in the study of a phenomena (e.g.,
Best et al., 2019; Laitinen, 2018; Petrescu, 2019). Accordingly, the present study sought to
borrow the conceptual apparatus of the framework from the PAM literature to locate the
findings in the wider context and develop a better understanding of TSO legitimacy.
As described in detail in the methodology chapter, the environmental definition of legitimacy
was not something the study adopted at the beginning of the research process. The abductive
reasoning approach allowed room for exploration of multiple perspectives of the
phenomenon and the relevance of the public service ecosystem framework emerged from
data, and from the iterative process between data collection and analysis. The analysis of
findings was painting a complex picture of organisational legitimacy going beyond dyadic
models of interorganisational relationships (Hewitt, 2000).

180



First, the findings revealed a number of interactions between the charities and their
constituent groups, and their overlapping and interdependent nature. When seeking to enact
their legitimacy, the charities actively interact with the service users and the organisations in
their network, the local community, and the funders. For the charities that run SEs, the
customers are another important constituent group. These are not separate, dyadic
interactions but the ones that can influence the outcomes of interactions with other
elements. To give an example, interactions between the service user and the staff may
influence the outcomes of service delivery. Parents, schoolteachers, or social workers refer
to these outcomes, in order to make judgements of organisational effectiveness. These
stakeholders may then decide whether to endorse the charity or not to others. Through
ongoing communications with these stakeholders, the organisation in turn may influence the
expectations and standards of these stakeholders according to which their work will be
judged by them.
Second, these interactions are contextualised, and their nature is contingent on the factors
both within the charity and their environment. For example, the organisations have different
strengths that play a major role in their organisational legitimacy, and the local milieu has
significant implications for service delivery in terms of what is deemed appropriate and
desirable by the local community.
Third, organisational legitimacy is determined with reference to social norms, individual
needs, formal regulation, and professional standards. Thus, for example, to legitimise, all
TSOs must comply with the regulative framework of the Scottish charity regulator and yet
simultaneously fulfil the individual pragmatic needs of the user. Finally, to add another layer
of complexity, legitimation processes are underpinned by the individual values of the nonprofit leaders and the institutional world of societal values.
Suchman and Deephouse (2008) suggest that future research should examine legitimation at
multiple levels – within organisations, among organisations, and within organisational fields.
They also suggest that this should include the interactions among the levels. This necessitates
the “nested systems” view (Holm, 1995). However, the limitation of a systems approach is
that the systems are viewed as a collection of resources (i.e., people, technologies,
organisations, and shared information) involved in exchanges (Jackson et al., 2010) while
unwritten rules, taken-for-granted schemes, norms, and beliefs that are significant
181



determinants of organisational legitimacy are largely missing from this perspective. In other
words, the systems approach does not provide the full conceptual apparatus with which
organisational legitimacy can be approached and analysed. In contrast, the ecosystems lens
emphasizes the central role of institutions, i.e., norms, meanings, symbols, and laws, and
institutional arrangements that represent these institutions (Trischler and Charles, 2019).
These institutions are central to legitimation because they represent the foundations of
legitimacy claims (Scott, 2014). Yet, because individuals have their own judgments of social
acceptability (Bitektine and Haack, 2015), the individual values and beliefs must be accounted
for. Therefore, the present study adopted and adapted the public service ecosystem
framework developed by Osborne et al. (2022) which at the point of writing is the most
evolved ecosystem model in the public management literature.
The authors present a heuristic of the PSE over four interacting levels: the macro level of
societal values, rules, and norms, the meso level of organisational actors, networks and
norms/processes, the micro level of the individual actors, and the sub-micro level of
individual/professional beliefs and values. The salience of all these elements in the
legitimation process of the case study organisations made the use of the public service
ecosystem framework highly relevant and appropriate in the discussion of the organisational
legitimacy as it allows for the exploration of these interactive processes between the key
actors, service systems and individual norms, and shows that legitimacy is enacted across
multiple stakeholders in the ecosystem, and not just in dyadic relationships between the
funder and the TSO.
The PSE approach has become a dominant framework to understand the complexities of
public service delivery, and the key argument of this study is that the ecosystem is an effective
heuristic for understanding the complexities of organisational legitimacy. The study, however,
adapted the original model to the context of the third sector. The legitimacy ecosystem of the
case study organisations comprises four levels, denoted differently from Osborne et al.’s
(2022) framework. Within the meso level, the present study distinguished the civic society as
an important element of the legitimacy ecosystem. TSOs are often contrasted to and
distinguished from organisations in other sectors of the economy, because they operate on
their own logic, have different institutions, and are guided by different norms of acceptable
behaviour. Because of the nature of TSOs as value-based organisations, they have stronger
182



links with both the institutional level and the individual level than private business or public
sector organisations. Institutional values and personal beliefs have a more immediate impact
upon them than they do upon a public sector organisation or a private sector organisation.
This level was thus introduced to acknowledge the unique characteristics of TSOs and denote
important elements pertaining to it such as TSO regulators and other professional
associations, and associated standards, rules, and norms of behaviour ascribed to TSOs.
The present study explored organisational legitimacy from the perspective of the charities,
and because legitimacy cannot be observed or measured, an indirect measure of legitimacy
was needed. The ecosystem of charities can be made up of a potentially large number of
distinct values, processes, and norms, and have multiple constituents. The study focused on
the instances when the interactions of the case study organisations with these elements of
the ecosystem suggested that the charities were not seeking passive acceptance, but
“protracted constituent intervention” (Suchman, 1995). Because resources are the media by
which approval and consent are expressed (Hybels, 1995), for the purposes of this study
“protracted constituent intervention” in the form of an endorsement, engagement and/or
supply of financial and non-financial (e.g., expertise) resources to the charity were selected
as indicators of legitimacy. In the section that follows the ecosystem levels and the processes
of legitimation of case study organisation are outlined.

6.2 Legitimacy ecosystem: levels, elements, and legitimacy
processes
Section 6.2 addresses the first research sub-question: How do TSOs seek to legitimise within
their environment and how do they seek to use their legitimacy to secure financial resources?
The section first discusses how the case study organisations define their legitimacy and
proceeds with the discussion of the ecosystem’s levels and processes of legitimation using
the adapted ecosystem model.

6.2.1 TSO’s definitions of legitimacy
The study found that across the four case study organisations, the staff had a clear sense of
the organisation’s charitable mission and was wary of “mission drift” or engaging in work that
was not directly related to the organisational aims. All the organisations suggested that they

183



are legitimate because they exist to meet the needs of young people as set in their mission
and have proven value of their work as evidenced by the positive changes in the lives of young
people. This finding suggests that the case study organisations justified their legitimacy or
right to exist in terms of fulfilling their charitable mission and delivering positive outcomes for
young people, which closely maps onto the definition of moral legitimacy, i.e., what they have
accomplished (Suchman, 1995).
TSS defines their legitimacy in terms of identifying and filling the gaps in provision for the
young people. They emphasize their strong reputation, a good track record of the young
people who have been through their services, and good relationships with the referral
partners. DST defines their legitimacy in terms of keeping their focus on serving the needs of
the community. They suggest that by adopting business-like approaches to running a charity
and keeping pace with what the public is interested in can help them grow and support a
larger number of young people. ETR defines their legitimacy in terms of focusing all their
attention on the young people from the local high school, whose needs they were set up to
serve. The relationship with the local high school has been maintained since ETR was
established. APT sees their legitimacy in the long-term benefits that they have delivered for
the young people in the Scottish Borders. They highlight their highly regarded experience in
supporting the most vulnerable and challenging young people in the area. These sources of
legitimacy are situated at different points in the ecosystem and are not just a product of their
relationships with a funder.
Given the importance of the mission in how the organisations described their legitimacy, in
this study, adherence to the value base or core mission of the organisation in terms of what
work the organisation chose to do and how it chose to do it, were taken as indicators of
moral18 legitimacy. In this, the study follows Nevile (2010) who argues that moral legitimacy
of third sector organisations rests on their distinctive value base, which provides the rationale
for the work of the organisation, and it is clear if a chosen strategy compromises the moral
legitimacy “when a choice is being made” (Edwards and Hulme, 1992, p. 213). For APT and
TSS that meant not moving beyond their particular area where the user is based, for DST and
ETR it meant activities had to be consistent with an overarching goal of community support.

18

Also referred to as “normative legitimacy” in most other accounts

184



These values are therefore an integral part of organisational legitimacy and must be included
in the ecosystem.

6.2.2 Ecosystems levels and elements
The section that follows presents the levels of the legitimacy ecosystem and covers the key
elements in each. It also discusses how the interactions within the ecosystem relate to
organisational legitimacy. It shows how the organisation attempts to make sense of the
legitimacy requirements of the institutional environment by observing, learning, interpreting,
and even influencing those requirements (Doz and Prahalad, 1980; Weick, 1993) and crafting
the services “of value” (Suchman, 1995) to the key constituent groups.

6.2.2.1 Macro level
The macro level consists of societal/institutional values, rules, and norms (Huijbregts et al.,
2022), and Osborne et al. (2022) suggest that the institutional level legitimises which types of
values are socially desirable. Values, in turn, may influence and be influenced by regulation
(Kostova and Zaheer, 1999). The government in its role as policy maker, funder, and
legitimiser (Chew and Osborne, 2009) can provide an enabling policy context to enhance
organisational legitimacy. The four charities have been able to secure funding for the projects
that were linked with the changes in the macro level institutional environment. For example,
the projects addressing the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on the young people have all
received the support of the funders. This study, therefore, suggests that the new conceptions
of values can increase the organisation’s legitimacy.
The enhancement of organisational legitimacy can occur in two ways. First, previous research
has shown that appealing to the societal rather than individual values can be a powerful way
of legitimating (Tost, 2011; Zelditch, 2006). For example, the schools have long resisted to pay
for referring the young people to some of the services of APT. However, the educational
rhetoric has changed to promote the view that the schools should teach life skills and support
children’s learning outside of the school environment19. Because APT’s courses in Horse care
and Rural skills are based on learning by doing, one of the local schools added the courses
onto their list of school subjects. Because APT aligned with the institutionalized, collective
19

One of the explicit curriculum entitlements is “opportunities for developing skills for learning, skills for life
and skills for work” (Scotland’s Curriculum for Excellence, 2023)

185



legitimacy judgments as to what is appropriate, the individual schools were less likely to
challenge the organisational legitimacy of APT even though they might not be endorsing the
organisation privately (Bitektine and Haack, 2015). Second, all the elements in the ecosystem
share institutional arrangements at the macro level and are guided by institutional logics that
permeate the ecosystem (Wieland et al., 2015). For example, technologies have become so
taken-for-granted in society (Suchman and Deephouse, 2008) that by building a technologyrelated service DST enhances their organisational legitimacy because they link with the
elements of the environment that are unquestioned or taken-for granted (Hannan and
Freeman, 1986).
The alignment with the institutional environment, however, can happen naturally for the
charities whose mission fits with the new institutional norms. For example, ETR and TSS
suggested that Covid has had a greater impact on the user groups that they support and
received a greater attention from both the charitable and government funders. This was
further confirmed through the interviews with their funders who referred to Covid as one of
the key factors that influenced their funding decisions. The charities, however, can be actively
seeking this alignment. DST and APT are the two charities that have been found to enhance
their legitimacy by seeking a greater alignment with the government policies. APT identified
and built on the changes in the national curriculum requirements in the Scottish Curriculum
for Excellence and secured a contractual agreement with the local high school. DST has taken
one step further and rather than waiting for the institutional norms to change in their favour
they actively identify and select which institutional norms to align with. Not only did they
adjust their service delivery to meet the new needs of the users brought about by Covid, but
they also responded to the changes in the employment policies for the young people (Young
Person Guarantee) and linked their services with the societal discourses about the climate
change and the technologies for the future.

6.2.2.2 Meso level: Civic society, local milieu, organisational structure and
processes, and networks
It is the level where the organisations create services and it includes their networks, service
delivery processes, organisational systems and norms, and the engagement with the local
community (Osborne et al., 2022), and as such a greater number of interactions takes place
at this level. Within the meso level the study distinguished the civic society element to
186



highlight the nature of TSOs as mission-driven organisations and to point to the stronger links
that exist between TSOs and the institutional and individual levels.
Civic society level. This level captures elements that apply to the third sector. They represent
the norms, standards, and rules of the game for specific fields within which TSOs operate. All
TSOs must show regulatory compliance with OSCR, but also with other sector-relevant
agencies and organisations with legitimate power to influence norms and standards. Some
elements may be shared with other sectors, for example, SQA, a public sector body
accrediting educational awards. SQA qualifications can be delivered by approved colleges,
private businesses (e.g., training providers and employers) and TSOs, but all operate
according to the SQA standards.
Schools are an important ecosystem actor for all the case study organisations because the
charities work with young people. Schools are often the key referrers of young people to the
charities. In addition, the schools are one of the major reference points in funding applications
of the charities, and their feedback is used to evidence base and support the claims that the
charities make in the applications, which helps endorse the aims, impact and motivations of
the charities. TSS, for example, partners with all six schools in East Lothian. Their staff attend
key school meetings with headteachers. ETR has a primary aim to serve the local young people
from the local high school and has a major relationship with the school. So does APT that
operates on a referral basis and receives most of their referrals from the schools in Scottish
Borders. All three organisations work closely with local schools to ensure the young people
are continuously referred, and the organisations fulfil their missions. In addition, for APT and
DST the schools are sources of funding themselves while for TSS they are a link between TSS
and the local council funding. In contrast, DST links with local schools are less strong. This is
because they have a wider set of partners, of which the local police and the local council have
more salience than others. In addition, Dundee and Angus are wider catchment areas with a
larger number of schools making it difficult for DST to feasibly cover them all. However, the
schools play an important role for all four charities because they are the source of young
people and key endorsers of the work of the charities to others.
The funders in the sample also appear at this level. Larger funders tend to operate with public
funds and be more susceptible to the institutional environment as will be discussed later in
Section 6.3. They tend to develop their funding programs with reference to the wider
187



institutional environment while smaller funders are more driven by their individual beliefs as
to which causes should be supported. For example, F1, a large national funder, incorporated
climate change and diversity as part of their new agenda (Appendix 5). F4 commissioned
nation-scale research to identify specific vulnerabilities of young people and determine the
scope of intervention required while F13 commissioned a report revealing the complexity of
the lives of people facing multiple disadvantages in Scotland. These two reports shed the light
on certain societal needs. They honed the focus of the funders and influenced their funding
programs. At the same time, F9, F10, and F12 are largely driven by the wishes of the founder.
The civic society element is closely linked with dominant public discourses at the macro level,
for example, user co-production which has come to dominate the public policy reform and
implies an expansive public participation in governance, policy development, decisionmaking, service design and delivery (Brandsen and Pestoff 2006; Cook, 2017). This new
paradigm of partnership knows as New Public Governance (NPG) (Osborne, 2010) may exert
coercive mechanisms on organisations, including the funders, to develop related practices
(DiMaggio and Powell, 1983). The findings that were outlined in section 6.3 of the findings
chapter have shown that user involvement in the design of a project is a key funding criterion
by the funders. In addition, the funders experience normative pressures from other funders
because they tend to benchmark their practices against each other. For example, the Hard
Edges20 report commissioned by the Robertson Trust received a wide media coverage and
acted to strengthen the norm that user co-production is key to addressing the failures of
public service delivery.
The case study organisations acknowledge the importance of the funder. After all, with the
funders’ financial support the charities can bring some of their services to life, and to make it
available to the service user rather than leaving it as something that exists only on paper or
in the manager’s head. The findings do suggest that the case study organisations do act
selectively when it comes to financing their services. The CEOs and the trustees in this study
are wary of the mission drift and highly cognizant of the importance of matching the funding
streams with their mission. The charities seem to apply the mission filter and choose the

20

Hard Edges highlights the complexity of severe and multiple disadvantages and brings further evidence that
public services must be delivered in a more coordinated way. In particular, it brings to the fore the issue that
public services designed to tackle disadvantage do not consider the views of the people affected by it (Hard
Edges, 2019).

188



funders who can be most supportive of the mission. This provides support to the study of
Chang and Tuckman (1994) who found mission to be an important driving force in the funding
choices. The charities take it seriously as reflected in how they take measures to protect their
mission from the funder’s influence. These measures included researching the funder,
maintaining flexibility of services, maintaining diversified funding base, and using persuasive
writing.
Rather than fitting into what the funder is prepared to fund, the case study organisations seek
the funder who can best fit with them suggesting that the relationship is not one way at the
very least. Despite the tight funding environment, APT and ETR, for example, were quite
optimistic and suggested that there is always someone who will be interested in what they
do, and they just need to do their research. When looking for funding opportunities, all the
charities research the funder to get a grasp of how close their interests are and stress those
touchpoints in their applications. This is where the role of the language in constructing
legitimacy is most apparent and important. TSS and ETR emphasized the role of writing skills
and persuasive language in communicating the fit, and how getting the right information in
the right quantities across is very important. This suggests that the case study organisations
were interested in the funders who shared their goals to avoid the mission drift and used
communicative techniques to persuade the funder of the closeness of their interests.
Creative packaging or presenting a project in a way that corresponds to the preferences of
funders (Ossewaarde et al., 2008) was not the preferred choice of the organisations. This is
likely because all the organisations were cognizant of their reputations that they wanted to
preserve. Instead, the charities preferred to maintain flexible services that can be tweaked or
re-packaged to be attractive to the funder while still preserving the mission (Nevile, 2010).
APT had a different approach of shielding their mission from the funders’ influence. Rather
than tweaking the services, they add incremental improvements to make their services look
different from what they were previously. Whether this flexibility of services has indeed
affected the mission of the charities is not the focus of the current study and should be
explored in further research.
The charities suggested that the processes that they have in place to collect and communicate
the key information about their performance support them in the funding application
process. For example, TSS maintains an internal database pooling information from
189



stakeholder surveys, progress reports and case-studies. The fundraiser then retrieves this
information for funding applications. ETR keeps all the formal assessments of their MAs,
which is audited on an annual basis by the funder. Evidence can also be obtained from piloting
services and APT, for example, used the evidence from a pilot to secure school funding.
The charities emphasize the features that make them look different from others. For APT, it
is a combination of highly specialised areas of expertise and non-traditional approach to
tackling mental health issues. TSS points to their long waiting lists and leverages the fact their
services are unmatched in the area where they deliver. So do ETR who addresses multiple
needs of the young people from the local school in the rural area, while DST emphasizes the
VR element of their service delivery model.
The charities diversify their funding sources to enhance community “buy-in” from other
funders, thereby increasing the perceived legitimacy of the organisation (Bielefeld, 1992;
Galaskiewicz and Bielefeld, 1998). The charities enhance their legitimacy by participating in
collective efforts with other non-profits to address community issues or problems (Nevile,
2010). This can be expected because charities are established to provide benefits to the
community, and participation in these types of collective efforts is likely to signal that the
organisation is concerned and willing to comply with this norm, adding value to the services
they deliver. The charities seek to co-create value with the service user and engage them in
service planning and/or delivery. Their engagement with the young people is a powerful
endorsement of value of their work to the funder. This representativeness or “downward
accountability” adds credibility and boosts their legitimacy (Edwards and Hulme, 1995;
Hudson, 2002; Pearce, 1997). Yet, they respond to the institutional values and norms to
deliver value through public services.
Local milieu. Few studies have examined the role of the local institutional environment as an
enabler of organisational legitimacy while research has shown that service delivery systems
are localised and evolve to meet contextual opportunities and challenges based on local
priorities (Leutz, 2005) and suggested to ground analysis in “practical locality” (Laitinen et al.,
2018, p. 866).
In line with these studies, the present study has shown that the locality can be a key enabler
of organisational legitimacy and the charities have all been able to enhance their legitimacy
by more closely associating themselves with the prevalent cognitive and normative
190



institutions characterising the area. The local area as a powerful enabler of the organisational
legitimacy is particularly evident for ETR where the rural, tourism-oriented community has
provided the strong basis to legitimise both the service delivery model of ETR and the SE
activity. For the external audiences such as the funders the existence of ETR “made sense”
(Suchman, 1995) because their links with economic (tourism), social (rural isolation) and
geographic (small, isolated village) characteristics of the area provided the strongest
justification for the existence of the organisation in the funders’ eyes.
The influence of the cognitive and normative institutions characterising the local community
on the legitimation process of the charity is similar to the influence of the macro level, but on
a smaller scale. The effects are observed because the cognitive and normative institutions
(the shared social knowledge and the values, beliefs, and social norms) tend to be location
specific since they are typically shaped through processes of social interaction within their
borders (Kogut, 1991; Kostova, 1996) while most rules and regulations are often the outcome
of local political processes (Kostova and Zaheer, 1999).
The same effects can be observed in DST that legitimises via the cognitive and normative
institutions linked with the football culture of Dundee and its reputation as a UK’s tech city.
Yet, DST’s claim that they exist to support poor and disadvantaged communities sounds more
credible because they are located where those communities reside - in the part of Dundee
characterised by a high level of poverty and organised crime, giving further support to its
normative legitimacy because DST is close to the young people from these families.
TSS’ services were not found to be linked with any cognitive and normative schemes
associated with Musselburgh; however, TSS’ legitimacy is supported by the favourable
regulatory environment maintained by the local council who have not opted for public
procurement of the services that TSS deliver, which supports the TSS’ legitimacy in the eyes
of the local community. This localism in terms of how the local governments in Scotland
choose to deliver public services has been the defining feature of public service delivery in
Scotland (Alcock, 2009; Roy et al., 2015; Sinclair et al., 2018). Local authorities have different
traditions of working with TSOs in their localities (Kelly, 2007). Yet, previous studies on nonprofit legitimacy overlooked the implications of this localism for the organisational legitimacy.
In this respect TSS can be contrasted with APT where the local council put out the children’s
services to tender which had implications for the funding model of APT. The finding is
191



consistent with Sinclair et al. (2018) who suggested that the possibilities of partnership and
co-production are limited by the self-interest of the local authorities, who engage with the
third sector out of necessity due to resource constraints and expenditure cuts and noted that
in Scotland local politics plays a key role in the patterns of the engagement of TSOs in public
service delivery.
The links between Selkirk and APT are less strong, albeit Selkirk hosts one of the largest horse
parades in Europe. Yet, organisational legitimacy can be considered to depend on conformity
with dominant discourses (Grillo, 1997) and identification with legitimate symbols enhances
an organisational legitimacy (Dowling and Pfeffer, 1975). These legitimate symbols, such as
“the local”, “partnership”, “user-led” are created by dominant discourses such as new public
management (Lister, 2003; Nevile, 2010). APT emphasizes their local knowledge and
embeddedness and have been critical of national organisations who deliver public services in
their area. The trustees at APT are all recruited locally, and the residence of board members
and the actual participation of stakeholders in decision-making have been found to be the
mechanisms for increasing the endorsement of the community (Leardini et al., 2019). The
Board of APT are active members of the local community, and the Chair is a member of the
local Rotary club. The Board engage in regular fundraising events, and APT is the only
organisation in the sample that has used crowdfunding to raise funds from the local
community. Resident board members foster greater community’s trust in the organisation
because they are perceived to be “one of us” and strengthen the perception that APT is close
to its territory and more legitimate for acting for a common interest (Leardini et al., 2019;
Swindell, 2000). They have close links with locally based TSOs and have partnered with them
to deliver services. Their orientation to partnership work has been noted by the funders.
Yet, the close association between the organisational legitimacy of DST, ETR and APT and the
area is likely to be related to the commercial activities of these charities. The local economy
of ETR’s catchment area based on tourism is influenced by the natural characteristics of the
area, suggesting that the physical location offers the highest potential to generate economic
rents (Barney, 1991) and as such building on these key rent-generating resources in the area
is rationally and economically justified (Oliver and Baum, 1991). For DST these key rentgenerating resources are Dundee’s football and IT industry; horse riding and equestrian
pursuits are a fundamental part of Selkirk, and the county is rich in stable yards, riding schools
192



and riding holiday centres, which makes rational sense for APT to use these relative strengths
of the area to develop their commercial activities. However, the SE activities of the case study
organisations are not purely driven by the logic of economic rationalisation. Linking their
commercial activities with what is commonly accepted or taken-for-granted in the area, the
organisations invoke the public’s familiarity with the existing social structures, which provides
the strong basis to social justification of these activities (Zukin and DiMaggio, 1990). For
example, tourism is likely what most people would associate the town where ETR is based
with, and thus it makes it easier for ETR to demonstrate their appropriateness to the local
community (Hargadon and Douglas, 2001).
Case study organisations often co-evolve with the local milieu showing a great degree of adaptation
to the local environment. DST is a prime example. Their VR project has expanded simultaneously with
the growth of the gaming industry in Dundee. ETR’s eco pods projects addresses the growing demand
for this type of accommodation in the area. APT identified the issue with long waiting times for CAMHS
appointments in the Scottish Borders. Finally, the purpose of construction employability courses
directly responded to the demands of local construction companies experiencing a lack of qualified
staff.

Organisational structures and procedures. The service systems, technology and processes
that frame the service journey (Osborne et al., 2022) are another powerful tool that help the
charities enhance their legitimacy. Embracing socially accepted techniques and procedures
serve to demonstrate that the organisation is acting in good faith to achieve valued outcomes
(Scott, 1991). Suchman (1995) refers to this as procedural legitimacy that he describes as an
indicator of an organisation's capacity to perform specific types of work.
The ongoing fulfilment of the expectations of the constituent groups is a necessary condition
for survival (Ashforth and Gibbs, 1990). The charities suggested that fulfilling their obligations
is part of their reputation and emphasized the importance of internal data management and
reporting systems in maintaining their legitimacy. For example, because the funders fund a
particular service, the charities have systems that trace costs and expenditures to specific
services rather than pool all the costs together. This was done to report accurate financial
figures. Further, their systems include various measurement tools such as SHANARRI or

193



Outcomes Star21 to record and evidence the outcomes of their work to external audiences.
These internal systems allow them to prove the effectiveness of their work and maintain
credibility, but the charities suggested that they should maintain honesty and transparency
irrespective of these systems. For example, the charities suggested that any deliberate
attempts to mislead the funder, whether conscious or unconscious, will have a detrimental
effect on their reputation, and if for example, the project is not going according to plan, they
discuss it with the funders rather than seek to hide it. Because of the defining characteristics
of TSOs is that they are ‘‘values-based’’ organisations (Lyons, 2001, p. 22), the charities sought
to institutionalize their values in their procedures and in their relationships with the
constituent groups to support their normative claims of legitimacy (Taylor and Warburton
2003; Ossewaarde et al., 2008).
This research has also confirmed that legitimacy management builds on communication
between the organisation and constituents. To legitimise it is generally not enough for the
organisation’s activities to be congruent with societal values; this fact also needs to be
communicated to constituents (Branco and Rodrigues, 2006). In line with previous research
the study found that the annual report22 is the principal formal means through which
management communicates with stakeholders (Yuthas et al., 2002). The study also found
website disclosures and social media activity as means of communicating less formal narrative
information about the organisation to the public (Dhanani, 2009; Saxton and Guo, 2009).
These forms of communication are used to seek a more formal regulatory approval as well as
demonstrate their effectiveness to donors, funders and other evaluating audiences (Costa,
2011).
However, the importance attached to other forms of communication with the constituent
varied among the charities. Organisations can obtain legitimacy by deploying different
accountability mechanisms with which to demonstrate that the values, beliefs, and successes
of the organisation are commensurate with stakeholder expectations and demands (Gray et
al., 1995). TSS, for example, published other voluntary documents for their stakeholders.

21

SHANARRI is a system that classifies well-being in terms of eight indicators, e.g., healthy, safe, achieving, etc.
(Scottish Government, 2022) while Outcomes Star is a tool for measuring and supporting change when
working with people (Outcomes Star, 2023)
22
Annual report is used here to refer to documents which comprise an organisation’s annual financial
statements plus any narrative management reports

194



Their annual reports were longer and more detailed, and the information about the progress
made by the young person was shared with the schools at the school meetings that TSS
required the project workers to attend. The CEO in turn attended meetings with the local
groups comprising the key referral agencies and represented TSS on the panels of other local
partnerships set up by the local council. Thus, TSS used the data to communicate with a larger
number of constituent groups including the partners and the general public.
This does not mean that other case study organisations de-emphasized the role of
communication. On the contrary, all of them acknowledged the role of social media in
enhancing their organisational credibility. The ability of the charities to engage in extensive
communication with their constituent groups is likely to be determined by the availability of
resources. For example, while APT believes they must be more actively engaged in
communicating their achievements to the public via the social media, they have limited staff
resource to do so. So do ETR whose staff already perform multiple tasks and rely heavily on
the board in the day-to-day running of the organisation. This is consistent with previous
research that found links between voluntary disclosures and size of an organisation
(Tremblay-Boire et al., 2016) and suggested that they require an investment of resources
(Ostrom, 1990).
Unlike ETR and APT, TSS is supported by the core funding from the parent charity. TSS has
been consistently investing these funds in developing the supportive service delivery
infrastructure which, for example, includes the case management systems, IT systems,
financial management and reporting procedures, and reporting and communicative
mechanisms. Every project worker submits regular progress reports in a standard format to a
central database. The data is then retrieved by the fundraiser to be used for reporting,
fundraising and profile-raising purposes. Compared to the other three charities TSS has
achieved a greater degree of formalization. Suchman (1995) suggests that formalisation is a
way to convert legitimacy from episodic to continual forms and as such this can be interpreted
as TSS’ attempt to strengthen the legitimacy that they have already acquired. The focus on
formalization reflects TSS’ emphasis on their reputation as the key basis of their legitimacy
claims and the underlying belief that their good relationships with key stakeholders have been
a source of ongoing support for the organisation. As such, they must invest time and resources
to preserve these existing relationships and seek to build new ones. By codifying informal
195



procedures (Zucker, 1988), TSS aims to protect accomplishments and ensure consistency,
predictability, and reliability of their services (Suchman, 1995). Much of the TSS’ legitimising
activity involves ongoing communication targeted toward specific organisational audiences
(Ashforth and Gibbs, 1990). TSS was the only organisation that felt the need to be accountable
to the referral partners. In doing so, TSS, is however, concerned with preserving
organisational interests because the referral partners have been the key supporters of TSS in
the local council who provide a large proportion of the TSS’ funding. This suggests that
communication systems can be powerful means to enhance organisational legitimacy (PradoRoman et al., 2020) as TSS’ ongoing communication with the key referral partners contributes
to the creation and maintenance of the institutional environment (Cornelissen et al., 2015;
Yim and Park, 2019), and justifies placing more effort on the more salient groups who have
the power to influence organisational outcomes (Gray et al., 1996; Mitchell et al., 1997).
In an attempt to legitimise, organisations often pursue professionalisation, thereby linking
their activities to external definitions of authority and competence (Scott, 1991). This
approach is evident in ETR who closely aligns with SQA and SDS to support their core activity
around the provision of education and training to the user. This, in turn, determined the
relative importance of these standard setters in comparison to the other organisations. As
the accredited SQA centre, ETR tended to show a greater need to comply with the
requirements of SQA.
The legitimacy ecosystems of TSOs are built on relative rather than absolute terms. This does
not mean that others were less diligent in managing the regulatory requirements or had
weaker data management systems – it is how the organisation sought to achieve its mission
that determined the level of importance attached to a particular constituent group. ETR
expressed their legitimacy in terms of their mission to deliver training to the local young
people while for the other three charities training is an important part of the service but not
the core of their mission. Hence, ETR attaches a greater importance to SQA and SDS than its
counterparts.
A powerful way of enhancing organisational legitimacy is user participation, which according
to Suchman (1995) represents an organisation's willingness to be co-opted by part of its
affected audience. The co-optation took different forms in the case study organisations from
involving the user in the decisions regarding the service design (co-design) to letting the user
196



choose how and when to engage (co-production) (Osborne et al., 2020). Co-production of
public services with the user has been widely discussed in the third sector and public services
literatures as means to enhance quality of services that the user receives (Pestoff, 2014),
reflecting the view that greater user involvement and representation make organisations
more responsive to user needs (Charity Commission for England and Wales, 2000; Locke et
al. 2003). However, the staff at case study organisations highlighted a “felt” responsibility to
involve and get feedback from the user as a way of giving such individuals voice and
sharpening service delivery.
It is likely that the charities co-opted the user not to provide symbolic reassurances to
constituents (Pfeffer, 1981), but rather to “provide cultural insights to managers” (Suchman,
1995, p. 595) and perceive emerging demands of the user as the final decisions about the
service design and delivery were made by the leadership of the organisations. Once again,
TSS was emphasizing user participation to a greater extent and sought to institutionalise user
participation in their organisational structure by developing their Young Ambassadors
program. With this the study did not find evidence of a potential conflict between a focus on
donors and a focus on beneficiaries contrary to what much of the previous literature
suggested because an input from the user is one of the key criteria according to which the
case study organisations were selected for funding.
Networks. Networks form part of the service journey and were one of the key tools that the
case study relied upon when legitimising with the funder. The charities referred to every
organisation in their network as a partner irrespective of the nature of the relationships with
them. However, the findings revealed three different purposes of partnerships. Partnerships
are formed to exchange referrals, enhance services, and influence funding decisions.
The partners in the referral network identify the user who needs targeted help. The support
network involves partnerships between the organisations who give their expertise and nonfinancial resources (e.g., access to networks) to support particular services. An example of
this type of a partnership is DST’s cooperation with Abertay University to develop a VR-based
training program. The strategic network has more direct implications for funding because the
organisations are involved in joint service delivery. For example, APT managed to secure a
long-term grant in partnership with mental health services. DST tends to have a more
developed network of support partners, TSS has emphasized the referral network, while APT
197



prefers strategic partnerships. ETR focuses all their attention on the link with the local high
school, from which most of their service users come.
When seeking funding, the charities evidenced their moral legitimacy by referring to their
networks. The findings showed that partnerships play a key role in the funders’ judgments
about organisational legitimacy. They influence legitimacy judgments of individual funders
because partnerships represent a collective that has accepted the charity as appropriate
(Johnson et al., 2006), and therefore evidence their appropriateness for others (Bitektine and
Haack, 2015).

6.2.2.3 Micro level. The service user and the staff; the customer and the staff
The service user and the staff. Satisfying the pragmatic needs of the user is important for
charities not only because this is what they were set up to do but also because the users are
first and foremost interested in the service that they are getting and have, for example, little
interest in participating in charity management or administration (Connoly and Hyndman,
2017). Yet, the ETR’s experience has shown that the failure to interpret the user needs
correctly can challenge the very existence of the organisation unless the charity can find other
means to engage the user. When charities struggle with user engagement, the past
achievements, the donor support, and the endorsements of the network can become
irrelevant because as argued by Osborne et al. (2022) eventually it is the user who is the
arbiter of the value he or she gets from a service. The user’s contribution as a co-producer of
public services is not only unavoidable but is also crucial to the performance of the service
(Osborne et al., 2016).
While this study did not include the views of the user (except for ETR’s MAs and a group of
young people from APT) and the particular benefits that they got from the charities cannot
be ascertained, it can be argued that a better understanding of not just the needs of the user,
but their context, i.e., the individual circumstances affecting them, can help the charities
enhance their organisational legitimacy. For example, DST suggested that the young people
from the dysfunctional families where parents may have drug and alcohol issues or a history
of offending, value the privacy that they can get at DST because it meets their needs and fits
their context. This is consistent with the service management literature that value is always
experienced by public service users in the context of their own lives (Grönroos, 2019). While
the charities have no influence over the subjective value emerging from the user’s interaction
198



with the service, the study has shown that the charities like DST can create conditions to “win
them over” and enhance their organisational legitimacy. Yet, a child of 7 is not always able to
articulate their needs due to their immaturity. This is the case for APT that tends to work with
younger groups. It then becomes a task for their staff to interpret the needs correctly with
reference to the user context. The staff at APT noted that the children’s troubling behaviour
is linked with their relationships at home, and they started doing more formal work with the
families of these young people. Legitimacy can be more easily managed if the charities not
only understand the user needs (e.g., IT illiteracy, lack of recreation opportunities, mental
health issues, etc.) but also consider some aspects of their lives when developing a service
proposition. The two charities that do so are DST and APT.
These two charities are more attuned to the school environments and relationships with
peers and family that the service user has. The findings indicated that DST and APT
deliberately distanced themselves from schools and focused on creating less intrusive and
traumatic experiences for the service user. They showed an understanding of the user
vulnerabilities stemming from their family and/or school environment. They adopted
different communication styles with the users and created the conditions that protected their
privacy and promoted a feeling of safety and comfort. They were cognizant of stigma that the
users were wary of. The service delivery models of DST and APT involve little direct
involvement of the staff, and the therapeutic effects are achieved via indirect means. For DST,
the means is dance, sport, and VR, for APT - horses and games. Even though the activities are
still supervised by a member of staff, they remain to be non-directive, and the therapeutic
mechanisms are “sneaked” into the activities. The service delivery models are more
empowering because the staff gives control to the young person who can choose the activities
that they are more interested in. This suggests that these two organisations focused on the
experience of the public service rather than its outcome (Osborne et al., 2022), and these
micro level interactions (Grönroos, 1990; 2011) helped manage the user behaviour and
secure their engagement (Farmer et al., 2012; Munoz et al., 2014). As such, their service
delivery tools proved to be successful among the young people and are one of the key
enablers of their organisational legitimacy.
The findings also show that legitimacy is dependent on the relationship between the user, the
organisation and their family and friends (Powell and Osborne, 2020). APT sided with the user
199



in the argument with the stakeholders over value emerging from the user interaction with
the service and involved in intensive communication with these stakeholder groups to align
their expectations with the user needs and what APT does to achieve those needs.
The same applies, albeit to a lesser extent, to ETR’s youth club activities that are fun and
engaging but lay the ground for the engagement of the user at later stages in their lives. ETR’s
mission is more about work experience and training and the charity does not engage in any
form of therapy. They tend to work with a variety of young people, and not just with those
who display challenging behaviours or severe mental health issues, and as such, the young
people do not risk being stigmatised. Still despite their focus on training, unlike schools they
avoid placing rigid requirements on the young people to keep them engaged.
On the contrary, the project workers of TSS have a direct engagement with the young people
and have high presence in the school. Suchman (1995) warns that any attempts to legitimise
may attract unnecessary scrutiny, in this case the user scrutiny. Because TSS works in close
relationships with the schools, the pupils are aware of TSS and feel reluctant to engage with
TSS for the fear of being stigmatised. Their service delivery model does not naturally contain
empowering characteristics, and these had to be created artificially. For example, the staff
are in discussions to release some of their powers to the young people by letting them choose
how to engage and involve them in key decisions around the work plan with the young person.
They also make a greater use of character references, i.e., the Young Ambassadors, who are
willing to vouch for the reliability of the charity to the young people who are feeling
apprehensive of TSS (Bernstein, 1992).
The customer and the staff. Maintaining a diversified funding mix was important for all the
charities, and hence all the charities sought to satisfy the pragmatic demands of the customer
groups (Suchman, 1995) and adopt the characteristics of typical commercial models that their
SEs represented. For example, the ETR’s hostel has all the characteristics of a typical touristic
accommodation, i.e., the booking link, guest services and presence on all major booking
platforms. In certain cases, the case study organisations were able to undercut competition
by offering lower prices (DST) or unique facilities (ETR’s accessible pod).
All the organisations emphasized their charitable objectives and acted to prevent the tensions
created by their commercial activities. In general, the findings showed that the charities are
very aware of these tensions and are generally better able to cope with their influence on the
200



charitable mission when compared with the impact of the charitable funders. DST rejected a
profitable commercial project with Coca-Cola, ETR closed the café, TSS decided not to profit
from their intellectual property on a soft skills measurement tool and made it free to the third
sector and APT rejected the idea to expand their clientele at the expense of the user. The
study showed that these decisions were made by the non-profit leaders, and their
professional and personal beliefs will be covered separately. They did so because they
believed this would lead them astray from the charitable mission.
They were however less able to control the changes in the grant financing. For example, a
tightening funding environment that forced TSS, APT, and DST to relocate might have affected
the user who was based in the areas they have withdrawn from. In addition, both APT and
DST rationalised their services and introduced structured, time-bounded programs of
engagement with the user to increase throughput in their quest to secure contractual
agreements with the local authorities. This finding challenges the view that the commercial
activities are eroding the distinct value of the charitable sector leading to a loss of identity
and a loss of legitimacy (Bush, 1992; Powell and Owen-Smith, 1998; Weisbrod, 1998). On the
contrary, it suggests that the charities can comingle business-like and prosocial goals (Dart,
2004). Moreover, the research suggests that self-support activities are the tools that enhance
the non-profit legitimacy in the eyes of the funders, whether government or charitable
because the funders have a clear preference for funding TSOs with diversified income base.
The SE income, thus, helped attract additional funding, and acted as a catalyst to obtain other
valued resources, i.e., grants (Gronbjerg, 1991).
Nevertheless, commercial activities must be carefully managed. ETR expressed concerns that
too much SE income (unrestricted reserves) might put the charitable funders off, and the
findings also showed how it impacted DST’s ability to pursue grant financing. The study thus
confirmed both the crowding in (Andreoni and Payne, 2011; Brooks, 2002; Smith, 2007) and
crowding out (Kingma, 1995) effects of SE income on the charitable funding. It does seem to
be a matter of what the funders view as too much unrestricted income as the findings showed
that every funder has a threshold of the acceptable level. It can be argued that the crowding
out effect starts to dominate when that threshold is exceeded, and further research can seek
to determine that level. Staff (organisational knowledge). The staff in all the charities play a
crucial role in promoting the charitable mission of the organisations. For example, each of
201



TSS’ experienced staff specialize in a specific service that TSS offers, e.g., housing support,
mental health, employment services, etc. and they all hold professional qualifications and
accreditations. However, when comparing the charities on this dimension, important
differences can be revealed. While, for example, the staff in all the charities plays a critical
role in managing the moral legitimacy of charities, the skill set of the staff at APT is rather rare
when for example compared with the staff at TSS who are very skilled but are not difficult to
replace. During the two years of TSS’ participation the composition of their team has changed
dramatically in comparison to the other three charities – at the time of writing this thesis
three of the interviewed members of staff have left while five new staff joined. APT’s
members of staff are all experienced horse riders yet have backgrounds in social work, family
support, and community learning and development. This combination of skills makes them
different from regular riding centres and from other charities working to address trauma in
children. They possess rare expertise, focus on a narrow area and work with particular issues
(trauma). All these characteristics point to a niche specialism. Previous findings have
confirmed the impact of niche specialism on enhancing organisational legitimacy (Baum and
Oliver, 1991; Ruef and Scott, 1998). Thus, the staff plays a greater role in the legitimation
process of APT because its ability to attract normative legitimacy is related to the scope of its
market niche (Hannan and Freeman, 1989).
A niche strategy focuses on serving a particular group of service users, a geographic area, or
providing a type of service better than other providers (Porter, 1980). Ruef and Scott (1998)
explain that the narrower focus of expertise in specialist organisations will often enhance
their legitimacy above that of comparable generalist organisations because specialism leads
to distinctive competencies and external evaluators will favour the organisation's strong
commitment to a limited set of services. In the case of APT, their scope fitted well with the
needs of the user (tackling mental health and challenging behaviours) and attracted the
attention of the funders with similar focus and aims but who became interested in the highly
specialised service model. As Baum and Oliver (1991) suggest a narrower focus plays a more
important role in success and survival of more specialised organisations because provision of
a narrowly specified service may encourage funders to maintain its commitment to, and
legitimation of, this service, enabling the organisation to continue providing its service.

202



6.2.2.4 Sub-micro level. Individual beliefs of organisational leaders
This study focuses on the values and beliefs of the CEOs. The four organisations have different
management structures, and there are some terminological differences in titles among the
organisations. All are governed by the Board and are run by the CEOs (Manager in ETR). All
TSOs can be said to have a “management team” but the boundaries between the roles are
somewhat blurred. For example, the Director of Children’s Services at APT is simultaneously
a member of the management team and a key project worker. ETR’s CEO is assisted by the
Assistant Manager who is involved in operational matters yet performs service functions, too.
TSS is an exception because they have another management layer of heads of services with
more clear role boundaries. DST does not have any of these additional roles.
Different decision-making patterns emerged when the staff interviews were aggregated. The
CEOs in all remain the key figures, but for APT, another key decision-maker was the Director
of Children’s Services, and for ETR – the Chair of the Board. TSS and DST were more CEOdominated. Therefore, no clear links between the size of the organisation (as in the number
of employees) and the decision-making patterns were found. Moreover, the findings also
show a high degree of congruence between the CEOs of all organisations and the trustees in
how they viewed the funding sources (Kearns et al., 2014). This study, however, did not have
further data to explore the different power dynamics within the organisations other than
observations and what the interviewees suggested themselves, and the whole discussion of
whose values come to dominate in the organisation may constitute a separate topic for
further research. This research could further benefit from comparing larger and smaller TSOs.
The present study will focus on the values of the CEOs because the non-profit CEOs play the
single important role in non-profit organisations and are personally involved in virtually all
aspects of the organisation (Dargie, 1998; Riggio and Orr, 2004). Importantly, the CEOs of the
case study organisations were the ones who made key decisions with regards to the service
planning, delivery, and funding, and there is evidence of the personal role of the CEOs in
securing funding for the organisations. TSS’ CEO, for example, converted one of their council’s
grants into a service level agreement thanks to her contact in the council. After many years
of negotiations with the local council that required persistence, persuasion, and supportive
evidence base, the CEO of APT managed to secure a contractual agreement with the school.
The links of DST’s CEO with the council coupled with his awareness of wider policy changes
203



helped DST secure funding for their employability courses, and the CEO of ETR developed a
business plan for the loan element of the eco-pods project. The findings confirm the results
of previous research that funding portfolios of non-profits are designed and managed by the
leadership of the organisation (Axelrod, 2005; Herman and Renz, 2000) and suggest that the
CEOs of all case study organisations could influence the composition of the funding mix. This
research does not suggest that the CEOs have absolute power over what funding sources
must be in the funding mix because the mission, access to resources, organisational size and
historical legacies have significant impacts on the financing of any given non-profit
organisation (Kearns et al., 2014); it only suggests that the non-profit leaders can alter the
funding mix (Ashforth and Gibbs, 1990) in light of perceived strategic opportunities and
threats (Kearns, 2006).
The strongest influence of the organisational leader on the organisation was identified in DST.
The personal qualities of the CEO of DST that were noted by the staff and the funders alike
such as a sense of strategic vision (Bass and Avolio, 1993), high personal credibility (Sears et
al., 1985), demonstrated expertise, and past successes are a necessary condition for the
attribution of charisma (Conger, 1989). His own self-presentation as an entrepreneur aligns
closely with the qualities ascribed in the classic literature on social entrepreneurs which
describes them as being driven by a strong vision (Dees, 1998; Roberts and Woods, 2005) and
possessing a strong charisma (Chaves and Sajardo-Moreno, 2004). The CEO is also the
founder, and the founder-run organisations are characterised by a culture that reflects the
founder's vision and values (Hollander and Ellman, 1988), and this culture then shapes the
operational style and the development of the organisation. The “founder centrality” (Kelly et
al., 2000) and the personal charisma of the CEO have strongly influenced DST. The CEO of DST
sides with the advocates of the SE model in the charitable sector and believes that running a
charity in a business way drives efficiency and supports the mission attainment. He is very
critical of the charities who rely on external financing which according to him is shorttermistic, and the staff involved have internalised his views (Balser and Carmin, 2009). He
believes that the SE must always look ahead, and therefore, he is more attentive to the
societal trends and policy changes to develop the service offer. He is a good networker and
has contacts with the key public sector organisations in the area. As a result, DST has extensive
networks, is partnership focused and commercially oriented. Importantly, his personal

204



legitimacy, which Suchman (1995) describes as the charisma of individual organisational
leaders, strongly influenced the funders’ positive perceptions of the organisation.
In summary, section 6.2 presented the four levels of the ecosystem, and the key elements in
it. It showed how the elements contributed to organisational legitimacy and that the charities
differ considerably in terms of which elements were more important in the legitimation
process. Importantly, legitimacy is not a product of two primary actors and does not occur at
the intersection of the organisation and its environment. It occurs within the ecosystem.
Before constructing the ecosystems of each case study organisation, a closer look at the
funding approaches of the organisations will be helpful to glean further insights and
complement the discussion of legitimacy of the case study organisations from the point of
view of the funders.

6.3 The funder-fundee relationship in context
This section aims to answer the second research sub-question: How do the funders define
and determine legitimacy of the TSOs? It aims to zoom in to the TSOs’ relationships with the
funder to complement the analysis of the TSOs’ ecosystems, and to confirm or identify more
elements in the ecosystem that play an important role in the legitimation process. The key
findings in relation to the funders’ decision-making will be outlined, and importantly their
views of what constitutes legitimacy of the case study organisations will be presented.

6.3.1 Funders’ definitions of TSO legitimacy
One of the original research aims of this study was to understand how the funders define
legitimacy of TSOs, explore their motivations and define what constitutes funding success,
i.e., how organisations are selected for funding. However, for the reasons discussed below
the exploration of funding success was omitted from the study and the original aim was then
modified to understand how the funders interpret legitimacy of the case study organisations,
and how their views can enrich an understanding of legitimacy from the ecosystem
perspective.
The iterative data analysis process suggested that the funders’ decision-making process is not
an isolated phenomenon but is contextual and is influenced by the factors internal to the
funder (e.g., founder aims, beliefs of the decision-making committee, relationships with the
205



donor), and with reference to a range of external factors (e.g., wider third sector norms,
societal needs, service user’s beliefs, etc.). In other words, the decision is not made on its
own, but through a complex and interactive process. A necessary condition for funding is the
fit with the aims of the funds or what the funders variously refer to as thematic focus, themes,
or programs. The funding themes or which causes should be supported are individually
determined by each funder, and because of the diversity of the funders and the small sample
size, a deeper exploration of what constitutes the funding success proved to be difficult and
thus were out of the scope of the study. Even the small sample of 15 organisations brought
under the umbrella of the “charitable funder” in the study demonstrated their variety in terms
of their procedural and organisational characteristics, aims, origins, and the make-up of the
decision-making teams.
Not only do the funders have complex decision-making patterns. The study also showed that
the funding themes themselves are shaped through a complex interactive process between
the funder and their institutional environment, where the individual beliefs of the founder,
where the funder is based, and the importance attached to the wider institutional
environment are only some of the contingent elements. For example, the trusts have
expressed a greater responsibility to fulfil the founder’s wishes and because they tend to be
locally based, they are more attuned to addressing the issues in their local area. They tend to
be less concerned about their public appeal (Botetzagias and Koutiva, 2014) and have simpler
decision-making involving fewer people whose viewpoints will be important in deciding
whether an organisation is aligned with what the funder is looking to achieve with the funds.
On the contrary, the funders who operate with a form of public funding pay more attention
to the institutional environment when setting their funding themes, may have up to five
layers of decision-makers often brought externally. For example, a large national funder who
fundraises annually via public appeals has expressed a greater need to consider wider societal
developments such as the focus on climate change, diversity, and the Black Lives Matter23
movement. They outsource part of their decision-making to an external committee made up
of the CEOs of large charities, but prior to that an external local assessor or expert (e.g., a
mental health practitioner) performs an initial evaluation of the proposal to decide whether
the project is indeed needed in the local community. There could be a number of other
23

206



contingent factors influencing the funders’ choice of which causes to support among which
the study identified their current priorities, the preferences of powerful stakeholders (i.e., the
main donor) and historical factors. Thus, the funders’ definitions of what merits funding may
have a contingent nature and must be explored further.
A common theme running across the analysis of the funders’ motivations is that the funders
have their own charitable missions. Unlike the TSOs that realise their missions via projects
and services, the funders do so via their thematic funding programs. Examples of these are
the funding programs to provide employment opportunities for the user, tackle a poverty
related attainment gap, or address mental health issues. Another common theme is that the
funders view TSOs as their key partners in the realisation of their mission. They do not support
the user directly and value TSOs for their proximity to the service user and expertise in solving
social issues, the characteristics that are usually ascribed to the third sector (Harlock, 2019;
Rees and Mullins, 2016).
In the Findings section of the thesis the funders defined legitimacy in terms of credibility and
trust in organisational claims, pursuits, and processes. The analysis of the funding application
process showed that the fit with the thematic focus, the organisational character,
competence, and practices were the key organisational characteristics that the funders were
interested in. In this, the findings are in line with Bitektine (2011, p. 159) who suggested that
when individuals make legitimacy judgements, the “[organisational] processes, structures,
and outcomes of its activity, its leaders, and its linkages with other social actors” bear the
most relevance. It is these characteristics on which the legitimacies of the case study
organisations will be compared.

6.3.2 Legitimacies of the case study organisations
There are numerous typologies of legitimacy in the literature (Table 2.1 in the literature
review chapter). For the purposes, of this study the four most used classifications from the
literature were selected: pragmatic, moral/normative, regulative and cognitive. Cognitive
legitimacy is related to conformity to established cognitive structures in society, what is often
described as having “taken-for-granted” status (Kostova and Zaheer, 1999). Normative
legitimacy is granted by any audience (including but not limited to professionals) on primarily
normative grounds (Suchman, 1995) and includes norms and values of the profession and the
207



larger social system (Greenwood et al., 2002; Suchman, 1995). Pragmatic legitimacy arises
from an organisation’s capacity to achieve practical outcomes in its immediate environment,
i.e., it must show that the organisational structure, characteristic, or practices are fit for
purpose. Regulative legitimacy arises when the organisation complies with formal regulative
processes and rules (Scott, 1995).
A summary of the key dimensions of organisational legitimacy of the case study organisation
is provided in Table 6.1. When making judgements of regulatory legitimacy of the four case
study organisations, all the funders in the sample first and foremost referred to OSCR to check
whether the organisations comply with the rules and are approved by the regulator and the
independent auditors. The funders’ norms themselves were developed with reference to
OSCR. For example, the funders often emphasized that TSOs’ good governance structures
should include the board members who are unrelated, in line with OSCR’s guidance. By
classifying the case study organisations into a pre-existing category of the charitable class or
organisations cognitive legitimacy of the organisations was also established (Bitektine, 2011).
Both cognitive and regulatory legitimacies are closely associated with the civic society
element at the meso level discussed in section 6.2.2.2 earlier.
The next important category is normative legitimacy. The funders described the work of the
organisations in terms of the positive impact that they had on young people and their
contribution to promoting equality, social inclusion, and well-being, i.e., the values that are
maintained by society-at-large. Normative legitimacy thus shows close links with the
institutional level discussed in 6.2.2.1. The funders treated the organisations as if they were
possessing of a personality (Zucker, 1987) and ascribed them with positive qualities, i.e., trust,
genuineness, and credibility (Table 6.1). These qualities contributed to the construction of an
image of a good character of the organisation (Suchman, 1995) which in turn helped the
funders establish the normative alignment of these organisations with the wider societal
values (Goering et al., 2011; Handy, 2000). This perception of the moral character of the case
study organisations was established through the funders’ own experience of the organisation
(“I know TSS quite well, they've got credibility, and they’ve proven that they can and do really
great work”), but also with reference to other constituent groups, i.e., the feedback and
endorsements from service users, referral agencies, local community, and other stakeholders.
These organisational stakeholders are grouped under “character references” in Table 6.1.
208



Table 6.1 Comparisons of legitimacy dimensions of the case study organisations
Legitimacy dimension
Based on Bitektine (2011),
Botetzagias and Koutiva
ETR
(2014), Scott (1995) and
Suchman (1995)
Cognitive (status)
✓
Registered charity
Normative (organisational qualities and norms)
Characteristics of good
good, best,
character
amazing

✓
Character references (service
user, stakeholders, referral
agencies)
✓
Established links with referral
agencies (referral pathways)
Partnership working (joint
service delivery)
Pragmatic (ability to achieve outcomes)
✓
Established track record
Reputation based on…
…local
knowledge
Organisational age
Service delivery model based
on…
Service systems and processes
Diversified funding (social
enterprise and/or large
charitable funders)
CEO’s personal baggage (track
record, leadership skills and
networks)
Regulatory (rules)
Compliance with OSCR’s
guidance

APT

TSS

DST

✓

✓

✓

honest,
trusted,
genuine

friend, good,
credible,
fantastic

compelling,
impactful,
transparent

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓
…staff
expertise

✓

✓
…local
knowledge

✓
…user
engagement

✓
…equine
therapy,
horses
✓

✓

…dance, sport,
and tech
✓
✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

The character references, or the individuals who are willing to vouch for the organisational
reliability and the quality of their services (Seitanidi and Crane, 2009; Valor and Merino de
Diego, 2009) played an important role in the legitimation process because their
endorsements communicated value that they were getting from these organisations. The

209



interaction of the organisations with the service user was a key funding criterion because the
funders see themselves as conduits of service users’ interests (Connoly and Hyndman, 2017).
User involvement is a mechanism through which the funders seek to reinforce their normative
model (O’Dwyer and Unerman, 2010). The involvement of the user in the design, planning or
delivery of the service provide the funders with assurances of mission achievement, and is
associated with greater legitimation (Wellens and Jegers, 2011). Therefore, the funders’
judgements of normative legitimacy of the case study organisations were influenced by what
their user groups say about them. Thus, further sources of normative legitimacy are contained
at the micro level outlined in section 6.2.2.3.
Another source of normative legitimacy of the case study organisations in Table 6.1 is
organisational networks. The funders of all organisations noted the established referral
routes of the organisations, and their embeddedness in the networks of service delivery with
other organisations. The organisational networks relate to the organisational level discussed
in section 6.2.2.2. Acceptance by other organisations in the network supported organisational
credibility. Organisational networks were important indicators of value that the case study
organisations were delivering for their communities (“[networks] is another way to
demonstrate that the work that they are doing is valuable to the community that they are
working in”). It shows an important role of the collective judgments of legitimacy on the
perceptions of the individual funders (Bitektine and Haack, 2015). With respect to joint
projects delivered in partnership with other organisations the funders noted APT and DST.
DST, in particular, was perceived to be open to partnership working. The funders suggested
that DST uses networks to propose new projects and enhance the services for the young
people, which had a positive effect on DST’s legitimacy.
Normative and pragmatic legitimacies are closely interlinked. The funders’ beliefs about the
good character of the organisations were rooted in the past performance and achievements
of the organisations because, as noted by Suchman (1995) assumptions of good character
generally require an established record of consistent performance, i.e., demonstration of
pragmatic legitimacy. To legitimise, organisations must demonstrate that they are competent
in what they do. Once again, this past performance of the case study organisations was
established through the funders’ own experience of the organisation and with reference to
other constituent groups. The past performance is an important indicator of pragmatic
210



legitimacy or organisational competence (Suchman, 1995). The case study organisations
differed on their sources of pragmatic legitimacy and some of them include their track record,
age, reputation, governance, organisational leader, and organisational processes (Table 6.1).
Pragmatic legitimacy is thus closely associated with the organisational level discussed in
section 6.2.2.2.
Across all the organisations, the funders noted that they are all well-established organisations
with a proven track record. The competence of ETR was expressed in terms of a less direct
measure, the age of the organisation. The funders used organisational age as a proxy for their
past successes, confirming the results of past research on the positive effect of age on
legitimation (Oliver and Baum, 1991; Ruef and Scott, 1998). Interestingly, and contrary to the
funders’ claims that the need must be suggested by the community, the funders accorded
sufficient authority to the organisations themselves in the identification of the need and
trusted their expertise (“TSS see the young people, they can identify the issues and the
problems that are coming through on a daily basis”). This suggests that the funders’
judgments rested on the organisations’ “reputation in related activities” (Suchman 1995, p.
588).
Reputation defined as a social comparison among organisations on a variety of attributes,
includes the regulative, normative or cognitive dimensions of legitimacy (Deephouse and
Carter, 2005). Reputation emphasizes the organisational attributes that can be inferred from
the past and is focused on what is "different" (Whetten and Mackey, 2002). In relation to APT,
it was common among the funders to comment on the staff’s experience in the identification
of the need or the reputation of its key personnel in previous endeavours (Suchman, 1995).
The funders tended to highlight a rare combination of their skills in professional disciplines,
i.e., horse-riding, equine therapy, and trauma informed care. This combination made them
different from other applicants, and consequently, the funders’ discussion of APT also focused
on their interest in the service delivery model of APT, which presented a different approach
in tackling mental health issues. DST’s reputation was rooted in their engagement with the
young people. The funders suggested that DST has close relationships with the young people
and understands their interests (“they're not planning things that young people don't want”)
and that the service delivery model of DST based on dance, football, and VR, in particular, is
a good “hook” for the young people. With respect to ETR and TSS, the funders noted their
211



focussed approach on supporting the user in a narrow geographical area, and their long
organisational histories. Both were selected because the funders perceived them to have a
very good knowledge of local needs. Interestingly, the funders tended to make multiple
references to the location of ETR, and some of them explicitly stated that ETR was selected
because it was a rural area. Previous research found support in the positive impact of
reputation on organisational legitimacy (Kostova and Zaheer, 1999; Staw and Epstein, 2000).
The findings indicate that when the organisational past record and quality of performance
were considered, the funder made implicit comparisons of the case study organisations with
other socially accepted organisations and was interested in what distinguishes the particular
organisation from others of its kind, and therefore their distinct reputations based on unique
organisational features vouched for their future performance (Bitektine, 2011) and played an
important legitimating role in the perceived ability of the organisations to create value for
stakeholders (Rindova et al., 2006).
There were no direct references to the governance of the organisations, and how they were
run generally, except for the high quality of their reporting. The only organisation that was
noted for the robustness of their service systems and internal processes was TSS. The funders
paid more attention to the financial structure of all the organisations, and diversified funding
mixes of the case study organisations irrespective of whether the source is commercial (SE)
or charitable (grants from other funders) supported their pragmatic legitimacy, i.e., the
presence of effective structures and processes supporting the mission achievement.
In terms of the leadership of the case study organisations, much of the funders’ attention was
drawn to the personal legitimacy of the CEO of DST, his personal charisma, values and “the
quality of leadership”. The funders described him as highly credible and trustworthy and their
judgments about DST’s legitimacy were often fused with the judgments about the CEO, for
example, normative evaluations (“he was personally compelling”, “they won’t find anyone
better than him”), and pragmatic considerations (“he delivers”, “he does various areas”), and
as a result the profile and personal reputation of the CEO had a spill over effect on DST. The
funders were particularly attracted by his focus on own income generation via SE activities
and stated that DST is different in that sense from other organisations because they do not
rely on external funding to the same extent as others. The personal qualities and beliefs of
the CEO relate to the sub-micro level discussed in section 6.2.2.4.
212



The funders had more narrowly defined self-interests and needs. For example, APT and DST
were appealing to their funders in terms of their potential to attract the attention to the
causes the funders were supporting and promote their organisational interests. This could
help the funder gain support of donors and other stakeholders. Of all the funders, the local
councils tended to have more instrumental motivations. TSS, for example, was seen as a core
part of the education and children's services functions in the area for the lack of a similar
provider of services. On the contrary, APT has been struggling to secure funding support from
the local council because the council funds a large national charity to deliver the children’s
services in the area. Interestingly, of the 15 funders, only three funders (one national, and
two trusts) were interested in building long-term relationships with the funded charities and
as long as the organisation maintained the fit, they were willing to offer ongoing funding
support.

6.3.3 Summary
To summarise, the funders want to make sure that they deal with a bona-fide, competent
organisation the aims of which are in congruence with those of the funder. These abilities and
qualities are not ascribed on its own but are informed by the elements that exist in the wider
ecosystem, i.e., societal values, regulatory standards, organisational networks and the views
of the service user, and the people involved in the evaluation of the funding applications. This
suggests that funding success is only one dimension of legitimacy in the ecosystem. Even
though the dimensions on which the four case study organisations were judged were
sometimes different, all of them successfully enacted their legitimacy.
Cognitive legitimacy of the organisations was confirmed via their association with the broader
social category of a charitable organisation and was linked with the civic society element of
the ecosystem. Normative legitimacy reflected a positive normative evaluation of the case
study-organisations (Aldrich and Fiol, 1994) and impacted the funders’ beliefs that the
organisations were effectively promoting societal welfare, as defined by the socially
constructed value system (Suchman, 1995). The sources of normative legitimacy were found
throughout the ecosystem and even in the values and beliefs of the individuals involved. The
organisations were perceived to have a pragmatic ability to achieve practical outcomes, and
it was evaluated in terms of their past record, reputation, organisational skills, the leadership
213



of the organisation and robust organisational procedures. Pragmatic legitimacy is thus drawn
from the organisational level. Regulative legitimacy was confirmed via their association with
OSCR and other relevant regulatory agencies, once again showing the links with the civic
society element.
Because the case study organisations secured funding from the funders in the sample, the
data was largely skewed towards the examples of successful legitimation and did not contain
enough examples of the situations and/or funders when the case study organisations were
rejected funding. Considering the competitiveness of the funding environment in which
rejections are common, the study was only the first attempt to uncover some of these
processes at play when the funding decisions are being made and a deeper understanding of
these is required. The study did not have enough data to explore how the funders’
perceptions of congruence are formed, and what exactly constitutes the fit and therefore
suggests that this should be the focus of future studies in their own right.

6.4 Ecosystems of case study organisations
The discussion of legitimacy from an ecosystem perspective has shown how important it is to
consider a complex view of legitimacy. The dyadic models of legitimacy are rather simplistic
and may conceal deeper issues related to legitimacy. In the non-profit literature legitimacy is
assumed

to

derive

from

a

combination

of

accountability,

performance,

and

representativeness, and implies that the correct organisational structures and procedures will
ensure legitimacy (Lister, 2003). It masks other important relationships and processes that
are present in the ecosystem. When compared across the TSOs, the various elements that
make up the ecosystems of the organisation have relative degrees of legitimising potential –
more important and hence more prominent for some while less apparent and obvious in
others. The charities in this study differed markedly in terms of the legitimising potential of
some of the common elements in the ecosystem. This section presents the legitimacy
ecosystems of the case study organisations and uncovers three main approaches to
legitimation within an ecosystem. In doing so, it aims to answer the third research subquestion: What are the factors influencing organisational legitimacy of the TSOs?
Some clarification is needed prior to discussing the ecosystem of each (Figures 6.1-6.4). The
ecosystem of each case study organisation consists of four levels outlined earlier: the macro

214



level of societal values, rules, and norms; the meso level of norms and rules of the third sector,
organisational networks, organisational processes and norms, and local community as the
milieu; the micro level of individual actors; and the sub-micro level of individual and/or
professional values and beliefs. Yet, there is one core element, that is more stable, more
enduring than others and which serves as a firm base for other elements. It is this element
that determined the classification of approaches to legitimation used by the case study
organisations:
➢ Sub-micro level approach based on individual professional values and beliefs
➢ Micro level approach based on staff expertise
➢ Meso level approach based on local milieu
➢ Meso level approach based on organisational processes
The description of the TSO’s ecosystems is what follows next. It will identify the key element
in the legitimation process of the case study organisations and discuss how the interactions
of the various elements generate legitimacy of the case study organisations.

6.4.1 ETR’s legitimacy ecosystem
Meso level approach (local milieu). The elements that make up the legitimacy ecosystem of
ETR are presented in Figure 6.1.
ETR’s mission centres around the needs of the rurally disadvantaged young people and
eventually aims to contribute to a more inclusive, fair, and equal society, and thus their
mission reflects normative values and norms at the macro level.
At the meso level as a charity ETR must legitimise with and meet the regulatory standards of
the charity regulator as well as SDS and SQA, the two public agencies with statutory
responsibility to oversee and enforce education-related standards and policies. These two
agencies provide further support to organisational legitimacy of ETR because training forms
the core of their charitable mission. By satisfying the requirements of funders, ETR has been
able to legitimise with them and secure funding support to deliver their mission. In particular,
by passing the more robust assessments of larger funders, they have generally become more
credible in the eyes of all funders.

215





looked completely different and worked in a different way. The needs of the area continue to
shape the services of ETR. The link between ETR and the only high school in the area has
remained strong since its inception, and the local high school together with other primary
schools have been a major source of endorsement for ETR to other actors, including funding
bodies, by testifying the value of ETR’s services and the need in additional educational
resources. ETR is also linked with other providers of educational resources for young people
boosting their legitimacy as a training provider. ETR is least networked, but this is because the
core relationship is between ETR and the local high school. The funders of ETR highlighted the
role of the area in their evaluations of ETR’s organisational legitimacy, and the location
alongside community endorsements and links with other organisations helped ETR secure the
funders’ support. All these interactions constitute separate processes but they all feed back
into an overall organisational legitimacy of ETR. In these interactions among ecosystem
actors, prevailing norms, beliefs, and formal rules, the ecosystem feeds their
acknowledgement of pragmatic, normative, regulative, and cognitive propriety to ETR. The
common feature of these elements is that they all come from the outside of ETR.
The core dimension of legitimacy that exists within ETR is their long operational history since
1997. Unlike APT, TSS and DST they have always been tied to one place. They are located
literally across the local high school, where most of their young people come from, which
means that they have been serving the needs of the same user group for over 25 years,
ensuring high consistency of their mission and the accumulation of experience. Their
operational history thus serves to demonstrate their competence and effectiveness and
satisfy the pragmatic needs of the constituent groups.
At the micro level the support for ETR’s legitimacy comes from the young people from the
local area. The user plays a crucial role in organisational legitimacy of all case study
organisations, and legitimising with the user is key. ETR has shown that the lack of interest
and engagement on the side of the service user can challenge the very existence of the
organisation if they misinterpret the needs or fail to sufficiently engage with the young people
to understand their needs properly. ETR does not just provide training and extracurricular
activities. They are the tools to tackle social isolation. In addition to tangible benefits such as
certificates, their service has a social aspect to it because the young people socialize and feel
less isolated. The realisation of these benefits is supported by the staff who use flexible
217



approaches to keep the young people engaged. The benefits for the young people are
acknowledged by relevant stakeholders (schoolteachers, family workers, parents, etc.), and
the young people themselves via feedback mechanisms. A somewhat separate group is the
customer, i.e., hostel guests to whom ETR provides a paid service. The engagement of the
customer with the service ensures that ETR has an additional source of income to deliver the
mission. Thus, ETR must ensure that their internal processes and structures work to fulfil
individual needs of users and customers because the engagement of these individual actors
with ETR at the micro level is an important indicator of value that they are getting from ETR.
At the bottom, there are the individual beliefs and values of the current CEO of ETR. She
emphasizes that ETR is legitimate because they are a youth project that owns a business, and
not vice versa. To them, the hostel is a tool to train young people. As a hostel, they must offer
a quality service to the customer but in doing so, they achieve their charitable aims, which
supports their mission.
During Covid-19 more elements were added to the legitimacy ecosystem of ETR – the
pandemic generated new societal concerns at the macro level that cascaded down the
ecosystem causing ecosystem-wide changes. New individual needs appeared in the
ecosystem and new norms and expectations as to what is deemed appropriate were formed.
The whole ecosystem readjusted to the external shock. Covid put a spotlight on the work of
ETR because they can make up for the learning that young people missed and created more
opportunities for ETR to legitimise. For example, ETR discovered that the social isolation rules
revealed the need to train young people in cooking skills, and they were able to secure the
Covid-related funding to install a new kitchen.
The ecosystem shows the interactions between ETR and other elements in the ecosystem, in
which the legitimating environment communicates their approval and acknowledges
organisational propriety with respect to established norms, rules and needs while in turn ETR
assures the environment of their organisational efficiency.

6.4.2 TSS’ legitimacy ecosystem
Meso level approach (organisational structures and procedures). Another meso level
approach, albeit rooted in a different part of the meso level, is applied by TSS (Figure 6.2). For
TSS, the parent charity’s ongoing support allowed it to achieve a high degree of formalization.
218





reputation, there is a higher focus on the processes that help maintain their reputation –
various forms of communication and the formalised structure to protect what has already
been achieved. TSS maintains their legitimacy via ongoing communication and relationship
building with the organisational and individual actors whom they view as important partners
in their continuing endeavours to create value for the user.
TSS’ mission to support the young people with getting back into school, finding a job or an
apprenticeship, or improving their confidence eventually aims to contribute to a more
equitable, fair, and inclusive society, and is in close alignment with the societal ideals and
values at the macro level (Figure 6.2). At the meso level OSCR provides their regulatory
approval. To legitimise with the funders, both local and national, they draw support from their
interactions with service users, referral agencies and other partners, which is further
supported by the procedures, location, and track record of the organisation.
They interact with a large number of other elements in the ecosystem. They draw their
legitimacy from their affiliation with the locally based Volunteer Centre East Lothian (VCEL),
which is the Third Sector Interface in East Lothian. VCEL was created to ensure third sector
participation and representation in local planning and delivery. It has themed forums and TSS
is a member of several of them (e.g., Third Sector Forum, East Lothian Third Sector Children,
Young People and Families Forum). These forums create an overarching agenda for the locally
based TSOs because they set the standards and expectations in the delivery of local public
services, and being part of the network enhances TSS’ normative alignment with these
expectations.
The analysis of TSS has revealed a stark contrast between the local councils in how they
engage with the third sector. The local council in East Lothian is more involved with the third
sector and has created more opportunities for the local TSOs to participate in service planning
and provision compared with Scottish Borders Council. The latter opted to commission all the
children’s services to a large national charity and withdrew grant funding from the local TSOs
that used to provide these services. TSS thus benefits from a more supportive local
environment endorsed by the local council. TSS does have close links with specific
departments within the council (Housing department, Inclusion Support Service) and service
teams (East Lothian Health and Social Care Partnership, East Lothian Works, Midlothian and
East Lothian Drug and Alcohol Partnership, East Lothian One Partnership, and Musselburgh
220



Area Partnership). The aim of all these partnerships is to coordinate the design, delivery, and
evaluation of relevant services across East Lothian and Midlothian. This gives opportunities
to TSS to use these links to reinforce their legitimacy because as a member of these
partnerships who participates in setting action plans, they can influence legitimacy standards.
TSS is indeed actively looking for opportunities to shape normative expectations of their
audiences. For example, as a member of Third Sector Forum, they have formed a consortium
with five other TSOs and commissioned a piece of research on the needs of the third sector
in East Lothian that they will present to the local authority to enhance their legitimacy.
Unlike other case study organisations, TSS have a muti-disciplinary practice team and their
services cluster around particular needs, e.g., employment, education, housing, mental
health, and caring responsibilities. This allows TSS to draw support for their legitimacy from a
larger number of sources to demonstrate their professional competence and adherence to
professional values and norms. These include LAYC (membership-based umbrella body for
local youth work charities), Borders College, Young Carers Network, Children's Services
Network Midlothian, construction companies and others.
Despite the reluctance of some young people to engage with TSS, their services for the young
people have no set time limits, which gives the staff sufficient time to build trust with the
young person before they start engaging with the support that they offer. These micro level
interactions between the staff and the user are important because it is the positive feedback
that the young people and other stakeholders give to TSS that helps TSS legitimise with others.
This, however, would have been difficult to achieve without the active agency of the staff who
use their skills to engage the young people.
The CEO of TSS has previously occupied leadership posts and worked in the voluntary and
public sectors setting up and running nation-wide youth projects and schemes. She believes
that TSS’ legitimacy is related to good relationships that they have with the referral partners,
the local council and the parent charity, and thus, she focuses on cultivating existing and
forming new relationships by raising TSS’ profile via networking, representing TSS in local
partnerships and strategic groups, and making her way to the council’s key decision-makers.
She is of the view that TSS’ mission is based on offering unique services that will be valued by
the stakeholders. The local milieu has been supportive of TSS: they take advantage of the lack
of comparable services in the area and deepen the dependence of the user and other
221





The staff addresses deep trauma-related experiences of the service user and pay more
attention to the experiential/phenomenological features of the service. Unlike DST that also
focuses on how the young people experience a service, APT aims to dig a little deeper and
treat trauma. The staff of APT was the only among the four charities to explicitly state that
value is created by the user, and they can only co-create it with the user by giving the young
people the tools to self-heal. In contrast, DST appeals more to the interests of the young
people albeit this does not mean to say that value of their services is inferior or of lesser
importance. It is different. APT is supported by their space, i.e., the fields, nature, the stable
yard, and the farm where they create a comforting and safe experience for the user, and it is
likely that without the staff they would have been no different from a regular riding centre,
and the unique value would have been lost. APT’s approach based on the principles of EAL
places the needs of the user in the centre, and the young people at the micro level react well
to unobtrusive and nondirective activities. The individual customer at the micro level has a
different set of needs, served by a separate staff team who are experienced instructors. The
interaction between the user and the customer is minimized so as to avoid harming the
charitable mission, on which APT’s legitimacy claims are based.
APT’s mission is more closely associated with the public ideals of inclusivity and safety for all
because APT addresses social, emotional, and behavioural issues in young people. These
behaviours often push them to feel excluded from their school and community and engage in
antisocial behaviour. At the meso level, compliance with OSCR’s regulations ensures the
approval of the regulator, but more support for organisational legitimacy of APT is rendered
by two professional bodies setting the standards for professional practice, the British
Association of Play Therapists (BAPT) and the Society of Equine Behaviour Consultants (SEBC).
Affiliation with these bodies is dictated by the nature of APT’s services. The core tool that APT
uses to tackle social issues is EAL and play therapy, and compliance with professional
standards set by these two umbrella bodies boosts their professional competence and
credibility.
At the meso level further support comes from the organisation’s partnerships with other
organisations. Of all the case study organisations APT is partnership oriented in the way
ascribed to the sector – they emphasize how they can increase value for the young person if
they cooperate with other organisations. As such, their networks contain more partners with
223



whom they deliver services jointly. This helps them legitimise with the funder, but they seek
collaborations not out of instrumental reasons to obtain funding but because they genuinely
believe in the value of collaborative work. They tend to have the core support of those three
funders in the sample who are interested in maintaining longer-term relationships with
funded organisations. Their local milieu has not been particularly supportive because they are
forced to compete with the large charities that deliver children’s services in the area as per
the contract with the local council, however they have the strongest support of the local
community as in residents who have fundraised for the charity.
Organisational legitimacy is also supported by the CEO’s belief that the mission of APT is to
serve the needs of the young people in the Borders. Despite funding opportunities available
from other local authorities, the CEO’s firm belief is that accepting referrals from other local
authority areas will take up the space of the young person who lives in the Scottish Borders,
and thus expanding beyond the area will compromise their legitimacy. She is personally
critical of the large national charities who provide local public services and believes that the
council must be more supportive of the local charities. There have been continuous efforts to
secure funding from the local council.
These are the main characteristics of APT ecosystem that shape their legitimacy but the
individual, micro level is the basis of it. There are thus continuous interactions between APT
and these elements in the ecosystem, in which the organisational propriety with respect to
established norms, rules and needs is met with the assurances of organisational efficiency
based on the knowledge of staff. The common element in all these legitimation processes is
APT’s unique organisational knowledge and skills.
Like for ETR, there are elements in the legitimacy ecosystem of APT that are relatively new.
The impact of Covid has already been discussed. In fact, Covid has affected all the four
charities in a similar way in that they were all seen as “appropriate and desirable” in
addressing the issues created by Covid. Of relevance to APT is the recent change in the
Scottish Curriculum for Excellence framework at the macro level. The policy set new
performance standards for schools and thus generated new needs in schools and service
users. APT responded to the need with their SQA NPA Level 4 in Horse Care and Rural Skills,
which increased the choice of school subjects for young people and addressed the gap in the
provision by the local high school. The high school in turn endorsed APT to the local council
224



and helped APT secure a commissioned piece of work. The possibility to do SQAs in other
subjects and learn outside of the school was also perceived positively by the young people
who were not interested in traditional subjects offered by the school. Another boost of
legitimacy for APT was related to an increasing public attention to mental health issues and
growing criticisms in the media outlets about the inability of the public mental health system
to cope with it (e.g., BBC, 2023; Kelly et al., 2022). APT’s approaches have proved to be
effective at handling mental health issues in particularly vulnerable young people. APT linked
with a registered Counsellor (British Association for Counsellors and Psychotherapists) and a
fitness trainer and developed a service intervention that attracted funding support of a large
national funder. This not only shows how partnerships are used to legitimise with the funders
but also that there could be different legitimation paths. The last two examples involve
different elements. In the former, it was a combination of macro level policy changes, meso
level endorsement from the local high school coupled with the need of the service user in a
wider choice of school subjects at the micro level. In the latter, it was a growing public
attention to a certain issue at the macro level, and the forming of meso level partnerships.

6.4.4 DST’s legitimacy ecosystem
Sub-micro level approach. DST’s legitimacy is underpinned by the personal charisma of the
CEO, and for them the individual, sub-micro level is the basis of legitimacy (Figure 6.4). The
CEO’s personality acts like a gravitational pull attracting multiple supporters and high degrees
of respect, trust and even admiration of the staff, the funders, the partners, and the service
user. He is an active networker and DST is well-linked with a number of referral, support and
strategic partners. The analysis of their ecosystem reveals multiple other interactions and
interconnectedness with the macro, institutional level as well as the importance of the local
milieu and partnerships at the meso level, and the specifics of their interactions with the
service user at the micro level, that all have a bearing on the legitimation process. However,
on close examination if the CEO is removed from DST, they become almost meaningless. They
are rather enabling factors, and their PSE can be said to consist of a larger number of enabling
factors contributing to their legitimacy.

225





One of the policies that DST used to legitimise is aimed at closing the poverty-related
attainment gap of young people and the other has a goal to provide young people with
volunteering and work-based learning. Both policies aimed to support vulnerable groups and
DST linked them with their focus on deprived communities. In 2018 they opened their VR
centre, the climate-focused project took off in 2020 while the employability project that they
developed in relation to the Young Person Guarantee started in 2022.
Due to their recent emphasis on climate change agenda, DST linked with Zero Waste Scotland,
which is currently a key endorser and partner for DST at the meso level. This environmental
agency of Scottish Government uses their legitimacy to link DST with other partners and
funders.
Similar to TSS, DST’s meso level is populated by a dense network of partners, funders, referral
agencies, and also the rules, norms and expectations of the network. It is also shaped by the
two most prominent features of Dundee – football culture and tech industry. The schools
have been the key endorsers of DST’s work since its inception. They were the first to observe
that the young people were attracted to dance and engaged well with DST. The key umbrella
body for DST is the local Social Enterprise Network, with which the CEO is actively engaged,
and this professional affiliation at the meso level is important for DST because they legitimise
their business orientation with reference to the professional standards set by the agency. DST
has developed networks of support partners with whom they deliver joint services. The key
partner is the locally based leading technology university. The collaboration with it enhances
DST’s legitimacy to deliver tech-based interventions.
DST’s dance, sport and tech turned out to be effective tools at engaging the young people at
the micro level. The project staff avoids putting pressure on the young people and act in an
unobtrusive manner which helps keep the young people engaged. The individual customers
of their services also fulfil their pragmatic needs by accessing DST’s services. For example,
members of the local community use DST as a leisure centre and as a place to spend time
together and socialize. DST provides the customers with highly demanded football pitches
that are of high quality and at lower prices.
Thus, DST draws support for its legitimacy in these interactions, which in turn help DST attract
funders. These are the characteristics of their ecosystem that shape their legitimacy, in which

227



the organisational propriety with respect to established norms, rules and needs is
communicated to DTS while it also seeks to demonstrate their efficiency and outcomes.
It is clear that the macro level plays an important role in the legitimation process of DST, in
general and when compared with other case study organisations, as it provides them with
opportunities to deliver their mission in new ways. However, it is the CEO’s vision for DST as
a dynamic, agile, and always developing organisation that makes DST appear more externally
focused and follow the latest societal developments. His ideas shape what the final service
will be, and he draws support from the macro- and meso level institutional environment to
be able to fulfil the pragmatic needs of the user and the customer at the micro level. The CEO
of DST sides with the advocates of the SE model in the charitable sector and believes that
running a charity in a business way drives efficiency and supports the mission attainment. He
is very critical of the charities that rely on external financing which he believes is shorttermistic. He believes that DST is legitimate because of their community focus and is critical
of national charities that according to him have turned into state-like bureaucracies. He
suggests that SE, climate agenda, dance, tech, and sport are just the tools to support the
young people in deprived communities, and that they can change the tools without losing the
focus on communities and therefore maintain their legitimacy.

6.4.5 Summary
Section 6.4 has presented the four legitimacy ecosystems and identified three possible
approaches to enacting legitimacy within an ecosystem – the meso level, micro level, and submicro level. The ecosystem view of the charities suggested that the elements are not created
equal. The study shows that legitimacy has a core element. This element has more legitimising
potential than others and acts like a base on which other elements are layered to produce the
desired legitimating effect. Another analogy is that this core element tends to be a constant
in the legitimation process and allows the charity to continue delivering its mission. If
removed or changed, the charity’s survival may be compromised. For DST the core is the CEO,
APT-staff, ETR-local milieu and TSS-organisational processes and procedures. These core
elements do not act on its own, though, and require other interactions. For example, the CEO
of DST relies on the local milieu to enhance legitimacy of DST, TSS-ongoing networking, ETRmaintaining the status of a training centre, and APT-service delivery tools (i.e., the horse). Yet,
228



levels may play a more enabling role for some charities and less for other charities. It is clear
that the macro level institutional environment plays a greater role as an enabler of
organisational legitimacy for DST, the charity that develops their services with reference to
the institutional environment, and as such, receives a greater prominence in the legitimacy
ecosystem of DST. Thus, understanding organisational legitimacy requires an understanding
of the whole ecosystem, and there is no one universal way of enacting legitimacy. In the final
part of the chapter, the study will propose an overarching framework of the legitimacy
ecosystem.

6.5. Towards the ecosystem view of legitimacy
The focus of this last section of the Discussion chapter is to bring together the insights from
the previous three parts and answer the main research question of the study: What
constitutes the legitimating environment of TSOs with different funding structures, and what
are the contingencies of a TSO’s legitimacy in it?
The chapter will present a model of organisational legitimacy through the lens of the
ecosystem perspective. The analysis of legitimation processes of the case study organisation
has shown that legitimacy is a multi-level, multi-dimensional and multiple stakeholder
construct, and reducing legitimacy solely to the study of a dyadic relationship between the
funder and the TSO risks ignoring the importance of numerous other constructs and processes
of the institutional environment. A weakness of an institutional theory approach that is
common to the range of organisational theory literature is that by focussing on interorganisational relationships it fails to consider other important concepts (Hewitt, 2000).
Viewing legitimacy as a multi-faceted construct, with different types of legitimacy and
different legitimising audiences, is useful for developing a more nuanced understanding of
TSO legitimacy (Lister, 2003). The ecosystem perspective overcomes the limitations of these
traditional models of legitimacy that view it as something dyadic, instead revealing how
legitimacy is contingent on broader interactive service ecosystems beyond the organisation
(Petrescu, 2019), which include both the service-specific elements of the system (TSOs,
technology, service delivery processes, etc.) and the broader societal context and values that
surround and legitimate this service system (Laitinen et al., 2018). Therefore, legitimacy
should be viewed from an ecosystem perspective. In the discussion that follows the generic
legitimacy ecosystem of a TSO will be presented and its elements will be unpacked.
229





The legitimacy ecosystem thus has four levels as has been discussed throughout the chapter:
the macro level covers the institutional world of societal beliefs, norms and discourses and
serves as a background to the whole ecosystem; the meso level is the most immediate
environment in which a TSO is embedded, and it includes civic society, organisational actors,
networks, organisational processes and norms, and local community as the milieu; the micro
level is represented by individual recipients of the organisational services - service users and
customers (for TSOs with commercial forms of income) and the sub-micro level concerns
individual beliefs, values and norms held by third sector practitioners. For the purposes of this
study, a wide range of all possible elements that can make up the ecosystem of each case
study organisation in Figures 6.1-6.4 were classified into two major groups. These are actors
and institutions. The term actor is borrowed from Bitektine and Haack (2015) and is used to
denote the audiences who confer legitimacy. These were covered in section 2.2.2 in the
literature review chapter. The term institutions is borrowed from the study of Kostova and
Zaheer (1999) and Scott (2014) to denote multiple domains of the institutional environment.
These were covered in section 2.2.3 in the literature review chapter. These are legitimacyrelevant constructs such as values, norms, rules, expectations, and beliefs. The structure and
the composition of these institutions, and their legitimacy requirements, typically vary across
different environments.
The general premise of the legitimacy ecosystem is that the actors hold beliefs, values,
expectations, and needs, and together the actors and the institutions form part of a
legitimating environment, in which existing institutions influence the legitimacy judgments of
actors but actors themselves are active participants in the process of meaning construction
(black double arrows in Figure 6.5).
An ecosystem perspective provides the conceptual apparatus with which to conceptualise
legitimacy and address the narrow focus of the previous studies. It presents the heuristics of
legitimacy at multiple levels. At each level there are sets of actors and institutional structures
that overlap, interact and influence legitimacy, and by studying the whole ecosystem it is
possible to identify how organisational legitimacy is formed. The discussion will first focus on
outlining key organisational and individual actors. The focus will then shift to institutions.
Finally, the interactions between actors and institutions in the ecosystem in shaping
organisational legitimacy will be discussed.
231



6.5.1 Ecosystem actors
At the macro level the social actors are society-at-large, state, and media. These actors were
found to be important sources of legitimacy for all organisations irrespective of their nature
(Baum and Powell, 1995; Dowling and Pfeffer, 1975). Both the state and the media play a dual
role in the legitimation process. They serve as an indicator of legitimation by society-at-large
and as a source of legitimacy in their own right (Deephouse, 1996; Chew and Osborne, 2009).
The meso level is populated by another set of actors – funding bodies (national and local), the
charity regulator, professional associations and other actors who are relevant to the policy
field in which the organisation operates. Because of the range of organisations that operate
in the third sector and the services that they deliver (Clifford and Mohan, 2016), it is best to
conceive them as being organisation-specific rather than sector-specific. These are
accreditors and regulators, specifically established to confer legitimacy on a certain set of
subjects (Durand and McGuire, 2005) and examples of these in the study include SDS, SQA,
and DWP. The meso level is also represented by umbrella organisations most relevant to the
nature of work of a non-profit organisation (Third Sector Forum, Social Enterprise Network,
BAPT, Young Carers Network). These groups have “collective authority over what is
acceptable theory” (Meyer and Scott, 1983, p. 202) as they set and promote professional
standards against which practices of a TSO will be judged.
Suchman’s (1995) definition of legitimacy is seen as congruence with “some socially
constructed system of norms, values, beliefs, and definitions” (1995, p. 574) implies that there
are more sources of legitimacy, and the aim of all studies of legitimacy should be identifying
those relevant sources with collective authority over legitimation in any given setting
(Deephouse and Suchman, 2008). The meso level is also populated by the local actors. These
can be local government, referral agencies, local TSOs and other private and public
organisations, local community as a collective, and local initiative group. These groups form
organisational networks and TSOs appear in the same box with other actors.
The macro- and the meso level feature collective, organisational actors. The micro level is
represented by individuals (Osborne et al., 2022) – the service user, the customer (for TSOs
who offer commercial services), organisational staff and other key stakeholders (parents,
carers, schoolteachers, etc.) as individuals. Satisfying the pragmatic needs of the user is
232



important for charities not only because this is what they were set up to do but also because
the users are first and foremost interested in the service that they are getting and have, for
example, little interest in participating in charity management or administration (Connoly and
Hyndman, 2017). Yet, the ETR’s experience has shown that the failure to interpret the user
needs correctly can challenge the very existence of the organisation unless the charity can
find other means to engage the user. When charities struggle with user engagement, the past
achievements, the donor support, and the endorsements of the network can become
irrelevant because as argued by Osborne et al. (2022) eventually it is the user who is the
arbiter of the value he or she gets from a service, and the user’s involvement as a co-producer
and co-creator of a service is crucial to the performance of the service (Osborne et al., 2016).
Legitimacy can be more easily managed if the charities not only understand the user needs
(e.g., IT illiteracy, lack of recreation opportunities, mental health issues, etc.) but also consider
relevant aspects of their lives when developing a service proposition. The service context aims
to capture how individuals engage with service, i.e., co-create it, within the unique setting of
their own expectations and needs.
In the legitimacy literature, an individual’s view of what constitutes the desirable and
appropriate is called propriety (Johnson et al., 2006). However, despite the literature that
shows how propriety may influence legitimacy at a higher, collective level (Bitektine and
Haack, 2015; Johnson et al., 2006; Tost, 2011; Zelditch, 2011), the role of personal and
professional beliefs in organisational legitimacy has not been explicitly recognised. The
findings of this study suggest a strong link between the CEOs’ beliefs and professional
backgrounds and organisational means and ends, particularly if the organisation is founderrun as in DST. The CEOs are the scanners of the ecosystem who act according to their beliefs
but because they are situated in the broader ecosystem their views are also shaped through
the engagement with the service user, the staff who work with the service user, interactions
with the stakeholder groups (e.g., schools) and the local community, and monitoring of the
societal needs, government priorities and funders’ needs. The non-profit leader is generally a
key figure in TSOs (Ashforth and Gibbs, 1990; Kearns et al., 2014). However, this could possibly
include the board members or other individuals for larger organisations where decisionmaking powers are more dispersed.

233



6.5.2 Ecosystem institutions
Institutions penetrate the system and exist at each level of the legitimacy ecosystem. The
societal institutions at the macro level represent normative, regulative, and cognitive beliefs
about what is right or wrong, the legitimate type of activities that are preferred or desirable,
and the legitimate causes that should be supported (Osborne et al., 2022). These societal
institutions are encompassing and affect all other elements in the system. They are based on
shared understandings that are taken-for-granted and often unquestioned because they are
held by the highest level of an abstract collective (Bitektine and Haack, 2015), and thus TSOs
operate within a framework of legitimated means and ends.
Although diagrammatically the levels appear to exist separately from each other in Figure 6.5,
in reality they are rather nested within one another. The demarcation is symbolic and was
introduced for greater visual clarity and the purpose of grey arrows is to show the
interconnectedness. The institutional arrangements at one level constitute the subject matter
of an institutional system at another level (Jepperson, 1991). For example, the climate agenda
at the macro level spurred conversations to re-consider current practices and create a
systemic change, potentially moving society to a new circular economy. This necessitated the
development of agencies like Zero Waste Scotland at the meso level. Their work is informed
by the principles of circular economy, and their role is to design, implement and promote the
standards of acceptable behaviour at the meso level. DST’s CEO in turn believed that by
responding to the climate agenda, they could better support the user. DST’s low carbon
leisure facility was designed in consultation with Zero Waste Scotland and specialist
architects. In this eco-facility DST will offer training in the renewables industry thus shaping
the micro level interactions. This way, the principles of the circular economy manifest
themselves at each level of the ecosystem.
The civic society is characterised by their own institutional environment. These are normative
prescriptions of what should constitute a non-profit organisation, professionals standards and
norms against which the practices of individual TSOs are judged and regulatory requirements.
The funders are active creators of these norms. They often set and enforce standards against
which the practices and organisational character of the organisations is evaluated. For
example, the funders in the sample have demonstrated their expectations of what they
believe to be a good practice such as what a minimum level of reserves should be, the
234



requirement to engage the user or to demonstrate strong governance mechanisms. TSOs in
turn have expressed the need to be seen as well-governed organisations to receive funding,
meet the reporting requirements of funders and fulfil their funding obligations to maintain
their credibility and trust. TSOs also obey more formal rules of the charity regulator. Under
charity law the case study organisations have their annual reports and accounts approved by
an independent examiner or auditor. In addition, TSOs must follow the regulatory frameworks
of other relevant sub-sector bodies, and act within the framework of normative standards
and expectations set by umbrella organisations. ETR, for example, must meet the regulatory
directives of SQA, for which they are audited on an annual basis. APT, in turn, operates under
professional standards of BAPT because their work is based on the principles of play therapy.
But then each TSOs acts within more narrowly defined local institutional arrangements, and
each locality may have different conceptions of what is “preferred or desirable” (Deephouse
and Suchman, 2008; Suchman, 1995). For example, TSS’ local context is characterised by a
lack of alternative service providers, high demand for employability services, and the more
partnership-oriented approach of the local council, which legitimises the need in the
organisation like TSS.
This is not to say that legitimacy is one way. The benefit of viewing legitimacy as a nested
ecosystem is that nested systems represent “interconnected, multilevel systems in which
each action-level or arena simultaneously is a framework for action and a product of action”
(Holm, 1995, p. 400). The constitutive institutional environments certainly become embedded
in organisations, but organisations themselves can manipulate institutional parameters to
facilitate the attainment of organisational goals (Lawrence and Suddaby, 2006; Ostrom,
1990). Through interactions with their audiences TSOs do try to alter some of these
institutions. For example, in the process of continuous social interactions with the schools
and the local council APT was able to influence their perceptions of service benefits that APT
could deliver for them. In doing so, they sought to implement social change in how the object
of legitimacy is evaluated by relevant audiences (Suchman, 1995). They attempted to alter
some of the local institutions, i.e., local norms and standards according to which
organisational legitimacy of a TSO within confined boundaries of a single authority area is
judged. Thus, individual organisations can play a more agentic role (Oliver, 1991), but not on
a macro or macro level but within their immediate environments (Suddaby et al., 2017). As
235



such, the meso level is characterised by the active agency of the TSOs in the legitimation
process.

6.5.3 Ecosystem interactions
Organisations must be able to maintain consistent performance to provide ongoing
reassurances of organisational efficacy to sustain regulatory and pragmatic legitimacy;
reassurances of good character to sustain normative legitimacy, and reassurances of
comprehensibility, through the use of communication-based approaches (Downing, 2005), to
sustain cognitive legitimacy. According to Drori and Honig (2013), external legitimacy (i.e.,
with external actors) can be achieved only if internal legitimacy is continuously reinforced. In
this study the term “rational effectiveness” is used to show how organisations seek to support
their internal legitimacy. The support for rational effectiveness lies in the “[organisational]
processes, structures, and outcomes of its activity, its leaders, and its linkages with other
social actors” (Bitektine, 2011, p. 159). These features pertaining to organisations signal to
the audiences that an “organisational structure, characteristic, or practice work or achieve
intended outcomes” (Suddaby et al., 2017). This is where the organisations differ most. TSS
relies on their organisational systems, APT – staff and their expertise, DST – the organisational
leader and ETR - the local milieu. Thus, rational effectiveness can be supported by an
organisation’s reputation, knowledge, systems, networks, people, and the location. However,
there could be a number of other elements. For example, in the context of service
commissioning, rational effectiveness based on the organisational size might be a more
important determinant of organisational legitimacy as the previous research on public sector
contracting has shown. Thus, further research can explore these and other factors impacting
rational effectiveness in greater depth.
The TSOs and their environments mutually reinforce each other. The actors render the
organisation with their judgments of organisational propriety while the TSO in turn assures
them of their rational effectiveness. The ecosystems actors legitimise a TSO while the TSO
persuades the audiences of its fit for purpose, i.e., the ability to fulfil the actors’ expectations
and needs. Some actors in the ecosystem also possess more narrowly defined pragmatic
needs and therefore will be more interested in whether “this agency does what we want it
to.” The funders are a prime example, while the service user may possess only pragmatic
236



needs. Pragmatic expectations are influenced by the position of the actor and their selfinterest (Lister, 2003). East Lothian Council, for example, renders continuous support to TSS
for they fill a gap in the provision of children’s services, operate across all the schools and
cover the whole area, and thus TSS supports the Council’s work. In contrast, a service user of
TSS is likely only to be interested in the benefits that they can gain from a housing service or
an employment course depending on their life circumstances.
The relationship with the funder is an essential but is not sufficient element of legitimacy. The
ecosystem can generate various patterns of a legitimation process akin a kaleidoscope that
presents an ever-changing pattern resulting from the rotation of coloured pieces of glass. The
various elements that are part of the ecosystem can submerge in various combinations, i.e.,
the ecosystem is dynamic, not steady state. For example, for DST legitimation was supported
by a combination of macro level conceptions of technology society, supportive tech
infrastructure and a fruitful cooperation with the leading tech university at the meso level,
and the interest of the young people in technologies. Yet, when they were set up, they were
equally able to legitimise with a different combination of elements, whereby they relied more
heavily on the support of the stakeholder groups around the young person, e.g.,
schoolteachers, family support workers, and parents who endorsed the work of DST. In
contrast, the macro level is less apparent in the legitimation process of ETR because the
location, i.e., the local context dictates the needs that ETR was set up to address in the first
place.
The ecosystem is not fixed and the elements in it are in constant flux. The changes in the
ecosystem elements can occur in various parts. The new societal needs emerge and dictate
new conceptions of legitimate aims and activities. The macro-environment is not static, and
the charities can select the moral “ideals” to align with to enhance legitimacy (Suchman,
1995). By linking with the climate change agenda DST was able to increase their legitimacy as
normative views at the institutional level evolved (Lister, 2003). Not only did they adjust their
service delivery to meet the new needs of the users brought by Covid, but they also responded
to the changes in the employment policies for the young people and linked their services with
the societal discourses about the technologies for the future.
Individual organisational actors, i.e., non-profit leaders can alter the ecosystem, too, for
example, by affiliating with a professional standards body at the meso level to enhance their
237



legitimacy. Through their association with SQA ETR linked their activities to external
definitions of authority and competence (Scott, 1991) signalling professionalism and
pragmatic legitimacy to the constituent groups. The CEO has obtained the status of an internal
verifier who “supports the credibility of internally assessed qualifications with parents,
employers, higher education institutions, etc.” (SQA, 2019). The organisation may change the
local milieu impacting the whole meso level. By relocating from Edinburgh to relatively
underserved East Lothian, TSS identified constituents who would value the services that the
organisation is equipped to provide (Ashforth and Gibbs, 1990) and has formed new
partnerships with the local agencies and close links with the local council. However, all these
changes must be anchored in the values that drive the work of the organisation. In this sense,
the role of organisational decision-makers is key in maintaining the focus on the underlying
ethical values. The ecosystems are thus dynamic and various elements become more
prominent than others. There is however a core element that is relatively more stable than
others, and the one which forms part of every legitimation process. This element constitutes
the core of the organisational legitimacy, to which other ecosystem elements can be added.
The findings of the study suggested compelling reasons for adopting an ecosystem
perspective to understanding legitimacy. The study pointed to the limitations of traditional
dyadic or stakeholder models of organisational legitimacy, and emphasized the benefit of
viewing relationships as systemic, legitimacy cocreating interactions. Institutions are “rules of
the game” and organisations are participating actors (North, 1990). Because institutions exert
pressure on organisations from their environments and determine their legitimacy (Lawrence
and Suddaby, 2006), identifying these institutional “rules of the game” helps understand
organisational legitimacy. Actors in turn influence and are influenced by the social structures
through their interactions (Giddens, 1984). The advantage of the ecosystem approach is that
it helps explore both context and system (Hodgkinson et al., 2017). By focussing on structures,
which include rules, norms, contexts, individual and organisations actors, and beliefs it is
possible to show that legitimacy is shaped through existing institutional arrangements and
actors’ sense of their social context.

238



Chapter Summary
The chapter discussed the findings of the study and aimed to answer the overarching research
questions of the thesis: What constitutes the legitimating environment of third sector
organisations (TSOs) with different funding structures? What are the contingencies of a TSO’s
legitimacy in it?
The iterative data analysis suggested the limitations of the existing theories to account for the
complexities of the legitimation processes of TSOs. The environment in which organisational
legitimacy is enacted is much more complex than what a dyadic approach can encompass,
and there are a lot more different interrelationships for organisations, and those
interrelationships are different for different organisations. The study then adopted and
adapted the public service ecosystem framework of Osborne et al. (2022) to account for the
complexities and show that legitimation is not just dyadic; it relies on other processes to occur
within the ecosystem.
The analysis presented in this chapter was informed by the abductive reasoning approach and
was based on robust findings across four cases drawing on interviews, observations and
document analysis. Section 6.1 laid the grounds of the adapted ecosystem framework.
Section 6.2 presented the four levels of the ecosystem. The elements of the ecosystem were
discussed and their links with organisational legitimacy were established.
Section 6.3 then commenced with the discussion of the funding processes and established
that funding success is only one dimension of legitimacy while the funders’ views of
organisational legitimacy of the case study organisations provided further support in the
identification of the key elements of their legitimacy ecosystems.
Section 6.4 established the ecosystems of each case study organisation and uncovered the
main differences between the organisations in their legitimation processes. Generally,
legitimacy is supported strongly by one key element. Based on where the key element is in
the ecosystem, three different models or approaches towards legitimation inside the
ecosystem were proposed: the sub-micro level approach based on an individual, the micro
level approach based upon the staff, and the meso level approaches based upon the local
milieu and organisational structures and processes, respectively. They are the prime mover,
and other levels act like satellites attached to the core. To understand how organisations are
239



enacting legitimacy the whole ecosystem must be explored. This helps identify which level
provides the strongest lever for organisational legitimacy.
The discussions in the previous sections served as the basis for the development of an
integrative conceptual model in Section 6.5. The model provides a novel representation of
organisational legitimacy through the ecosystem lens. The conceptual model of legitimation
processes of the case study organisations reveals how legitimacy is contingent on broader
interactive service ecosystems. This conceptual model also delineates the contributions made
in this thesis, which are discussed in the next chapter.

240



CHAPTER 7. CONCLUSION

Chapter overview
This chapter presents the conclusions of the thesis and outlines its contributions. It
commences with a summary of the research and research aims that guided this study. It then
continues with a brief overview of the findings identified within this research. The subsequent
sections outline the theoretical, empirical, and practical contributions of this thesis. The
chapter concludes by discussing the limitations of the research and directions for future
research.

7.1 Research summary
As mentioned in the introductory part of the thesis and further developed in the methodology
chapter, this research was carried out during the Covid-19 pandemic against the background
of lasting lockdowns, self-isolation requirements and travel restrictions. This had a significant
impact on the study. In particular, the author had to change the focus of the study halfway
through the PhD program and formulate a new research question. Covid-19 impacted TSOs
as well and changed the way they operated during the pandemic. The staff were under
mounting pressure to cope with the increased demand for their services while experiencing
high levels of stress. All these factors influenced some methodological choices that were
made and the subsequent data that was collected.
The thesis departed from the original research question concerning social investment and
expanded to the study of the relationships between legitimacy and TSOs’ funding portfolios.
Funding has been a subject of considerable debates in the non-profit literature because
financing in the third sector is different from either the public or private sectors and is
necessary to support the ongoing fulfilment of charitable missions by these organisations
(Bielefeld, 1992). TSOs rely on a wider variety of funding mechanisms which include grants,
public donations, contracts, crowdfunding, social investment, trading, or SE activities and
have different proportions of each in their funding structures. Because legitimacy is linked
with the ability of organisations to secure resources and ensure their survival, the study
focused on understanding legitimacy of TSOs and the processes that contribute to their
legitimacy.
241



The following overarching research question guided this thesis:
What constitutes the legitimating environment of third sector organisations (TSOs) with
different funding structures? What are the contingencies of a TSO’s legitimacy within this
environment?
To address the overarching research question, the following research sub-questions were
developed:
1. How do TSOs seek to legitimise within their environment and how do they seek to use their
legitimacy to secure financial resources?
2. How do the funders define and determine legitimacy of TSOs?
3. What are the factors influencing organisational legitimacy of TSOs?
The gap this research aimed to fill was twofold; firstly, the non-profit literature on TSO
legitimacy has maintained a focus on the funder as the main actor who grants legitimacy to
TSOs (Kelly, 2007; Zaidi, 1999) while the complexity of the TSOs suggested that legitimacy of
TSOs requires expanding the focus to embrace a broader view (Lister, 2003); second, the
review of existing studies has uncovered a lack of a unifying theoretical framework in both
literatures (non-profit and mainstream legitimacy studies) to explain this complexity of TSO
legitimacy. TSOs are complex organisations because they have multiple constituencies, who
may have different needs and expectations (Carré et al., 2021), they exist to meet a social
need which sometimes must be balanced against the market logic or public service logic
(Moore, 2000), and they may have several funding sources that must be carefully balanced
against each other (Froelich, 1999). In addition, they operate in different locations and thus
are exposed to different institutional contexts (Kostova and Zaheer, 1999). Moreover, the
studies in the mainstream legitimacy literature have added another level of complexity to the
phenomena of TSO legitimacy because legitimacy is multi-dimensional (i.e., made up of
norms, values, formal rules, and cognitive schemes) (Suchman, 1995), multi-constituent
(Scott, 1995), socially constructed, and thus context dependent (Hybels, 1995).
This study drew upon the principles of abductive reasoning research (Dubois and Gadde,
2002), which involves concurrent data collection and interpretation. Accordingly, the research
was guided by an emerging framework and an evolving empirical case and involved constant
242



reflection of the author on what the best explanation of the phenomenon should be.
Accordingly, after several rounds of theory matching (Kovács and Spens, 2005), the author
decided to incorporate the insights from contemporary PAM literature to explore legitimacy
and legitimation of TSOs. In particular, this study builds on the recent advances in the
application of the ecosystem approach in understanding public services (Hodgkinson et al.,
2017; Osborne et al., 2022; Trischler and Trischler, 2022). The authors in this strand of
literature apply the ecosystem approach in a more structured way and use it as an operational
concept rather than a metaphor for a complex environment. The study adapted the model to
the non-profit context by distinguishing the civic society as an important element of the
legitimacy ecosystem of TSOs. This was discussed in section 6.1 of the discussion chapter.
Chapter 4 and Chapter 5 presented the empirical data for further analysis collected from the
participants and informed by observations and document analysis. In particular, Chapter 4
provided extensive details of the environments in which the case study organisations
operated. The first sub-question was addressed in Section 6.2 of the discussion chapter and
was informed by the empirical data. It outlined the major constituent groups with which the
case study organisations interacted and presented the approaches that the organisations
used to secure approval, support, or endorsement of these groups. An important finding of
this chapter was that a multitude of legitimation processes were taking place within the
environments of the case study organisations.
In fact, most of these processes did not concern the funder suggesting that organisational
legitimacy of TSOs is multidimensional, and legitimation with funders is just one of these
dimensions. Other groups concerned service users, customers, local community, partners,
referral agencies, regulators, and professional associations. Multiple linkages, however,
existed between the constituents, organisational processes, and the wider environment. This
was best exemplified by the links between the codes. For example, the views of the
organisational leader of APT on their organisational mission as supporting young people who
live in the Scottish Borders (CEO’s beliefs) encouraged them to seek to form local partnerships
(partnership working) and reject finding opportunities that were available outside of the
Scottish Borders (securing funding). These insights allowed the author to answer the first
research sub-question in Section 6.2 and establish the audiences that the organisations
sought to legitimise with and explain the approaches that they pursued to legitimise. This
243



breakdown by audiences and approaches helped establish how they corresponded to the
elements of the ecosystem.
The findings presented in Chapter 5 provided a corpus of empirical data that further
developed theoretical propositions of the study. In particular, Chapter 5 presented the
funders’ perspectives on the legitimacy of the case study organisations, adding further
insights into the funder-fundee relationships. It uncovered the criteria that the funders use
when making judgements of organisational legitimacy. Importantly, the findings suggested
that each case study organisation stood out in some way. These insights allowed the author
to address the second research sub-question in Section 6.3 and explain how the funders
define and determine legitimacy of TSOs and obtain further evidence of the key elements that
make up the legitimacy ecosystem of the organisations.
Answering the first two research sub-questions allowed the author to approach the third
research sub-question by distinguishing between three different approaches to legitimation
in an ecosystem. This was done in Section 6.4. Four separate legitimacy ecosystems of each
case study organisations were presented and the factors that contributed to legitimacy of
each organisation were discussed.
Finally, based on the comprehensive analysis of the separate diagrams and comparisons of
their structures and underlying processes occurring in each allowed proposing an overarching
legitimacy framework for TSOs. The diagram was presented in Section 6.5. It provides an
answer to the research question that guided this study. It conceptualises legitimacy as a multidimensional, multi-level and multi-perspective concept and offers different lens to viewing
TSO legitimacy.
Accordingly, this study offers the following contributions to theory:
(i) It embraces a holistic view on legitimacy and provides an empirical demonstration that in
the TSO context, the understanding of legitimacy cannot be reduced to dyads.
(ii) It advances the understanding of funder-fundee relationships and challenges the view that
TSOs are relatively powerless in this relationship.

244



(iii) It expands the model of TSO legitimacy by including a larger number of factors that have
relevance to legitimacy.
(iv) It develops the application of the PSE framework to the non-profit context.
These contributions are discussed in the next section of this chapter.

7.2 Theoretical contribution
(i) Embracing a holistic view on legitimacy
Traditionally, most research in legitimacy literature has focused on legitimacy granted by
influential sources at a collective level of analysis (Deephouse et al., 2017). The main literature
on TSO legitimacy has remained concerned with the role of “powerful” constituents on
organisational legitimacy, which typically include state and charitable funders (e.g.,
Buckingham, 2012; Milbourne and Cushman, 2015).
The main theoretical contribution of the study is that it has shifted the focus away from these
narrow, dyadic conceptualisations of organisational legitimacy and acknowledged the
multiplicity of legitimation processes co-occurring within an ecosystem of the organisation.
Using the ecosystem approach, multiple actors including funders, service users, staff,
customers, partners, regulators, and TSOs have been included in the model of TSO legitimacy.
Moreover, this model has recognised multiple interdependencies of the elements in the
ecosystem and located them in their geographic and institutional milieu. It showed that in the
non-profit context legitimacy is based on several key elements working together (Brown et
al., 2001; Lister, 2003).
Contemporary literature on legitimacy suggests that possible sources of legitimising accounts
are not limited to any fixed set of potential gatekeepers and the definition of relevant actors
is context dependent (Deephouse et al., 2017). The study has provided a tool to explore the
context of TSOs, identify the sources of organisational legitimacy and establish the key
constituent groups whose support, approval and endorsement plays an important role in the
legitimation process. The proposed framework addresses the call of Suddaby et al. (2017) to
examine legitimation at multiple levels – within organisations, among organisations, and
within organisational fields. Unlike Bitektine (2011) the study suggests that legitimacy is not
245



within the exclusive purview of collective authorities or “legitimate others” but involves
individuals as well, i.e., service users and their parents, customers, and staff members whose
individual judgements influence organisational legitimacy, too.
Considering legitimacy as a socially constructed phenomenon allows for the exploration of
the different ways in which legitimacy can be enacted. Accordingly, the study proposed three
different approaches to legitimation in an ecosystem based on the core element, which has
more legitimising potential than others within an ecosystem as a whole. To identify the core
elements and how they can support organisational legitimacy one must explore the whole
ecosystem. The ecosystems are not a steady state because legitimacy is an ongoing status
(Chapman and Lowndes, 2014). Accordingly, there are several ways for TSOs to enact their
legitimacy by managing the mix of normative, cognitive, regulative, and pragmatic needs and
adapting them to different contexts (Suchman, 1995).
A “total” of TSO legitimacy is a result of the interplay between legitimising processes with the
funders, communities, users, partners, regulators, and other organisations and how they are
supported by the institutional environments and individual beliefs. It is how these different
legitimising processes interact that is important for TSO legitimacy, and if they support each
other, it will strengthen legitimacy at all levels for them. Hence, legitimacy is socially
constructed (Suchman, 1995) through multiple interactions in the ecosystem and its
definition varies across the organisational settings (Kostova and Zaheer, 1999; Ruef and Scott,
1998). While this research has not uncovered any tensions between interactions, the
ecosystem has the potential to explore these in greater detail.
(ii) Advancing an understanding of funder-fundee relationships
Contemporary legitimacy research encourages researchers to take multiple perspectives on
legitimacy into account and explore it at the individual level of analysis (Suddaby et al., 2017).
This study addresses the call by bringing the perspectives of individual funding officers into
the model of TSO legitimacy. It has been shown that not only do they make judgements of
pragmatic, normative, regulative, and cognitive legitimacy of TSOs but further confirmation
has been received that the sources of these judgements are in the various parts of the TSO’s
ecosystem. In other words, the funders make references to service users, organisational

246



processes, regulative compliance, and other elements in that organisation’s ecosystem to
help form perceptions about organisational legitimacy.
The social construction of legitimacy implies a more agentic role that the organisations can
play in legitimacy (Suchman, 1995). This study concurs with Macmillan and Paine (2021) who
challenged the view that TSOs are relatively powerless in the face of wider forces. This study
has shown that TSOs do not passively accept the rules set by existing institutions but attempt
to change them and turn to their advantage. Yet, and contrary to what much of the literature
on non-profit financing suggests (e.g., Buckingham, 2012; Kelly, 2007; Milbourne and
Cushman, 2015; Zaidi, 1999), the funders of the case study organisations have not been found
to be actively imposing their requirements on individual organisations and determine the
outcomes of individual services and programs. The funding themes are broadly set, and the
funders tend to relatively passively accept what TSOs can offer. Yet, what this study has also
shown is that the funders are to some extent dependent on TSOs for the fulfilment of their
own missions, which has not been recognised in non-profit literature before.
The empirical data has demonstrated that the relationship between the funder and the
fundee is not one-way, in which the funder always grants legitimacy to a TSO. The relationship
can be reversed, i.e., it is a TSO that enhances legitimacy of a charitable funder. Once again,
this challenges the view that TSOs are necessarily powerless in the funder-fundee
relationships. TSOs may be perceived as particularly attractive on certain dimensions. For
example, despite the relatively small size of DST, its funders have expressed their ongoing
willingness to support this organisation for their good reputation and good track record. By
close association with DST, the funders themselves can boost their legitimacy because they
are connected with legitimate others (Bitektine, 2011). Yet, a large national funder of APT was
interested in the knowledge that the staff of this organisation had about supporting mental
health issues and used APT in its fundraising campaigns suggesting that the funder perceived
attractive pragmatic gains (Suchman, 1995) from the relationship with APT.

247



(iii) Expanding the model of TSO legitimacy and adapting the PSE framework to the non-profit
context
This study has emphasized the role of the local institutional environment in organisational
legitimacy of TSOs because institutional environments can be fragmented (Scott, 1995). Not
only there are differences between Scotland and England, but Scottish TSOs operate in
different parts of Scotland and are thus exposed to different sources of authority (Kostova
and Zaheer, 1999). The results have shown that the local milieu not only shapes what these
organisations could offer but that different TSOs are subject to different local institutions and
have different relationships with local authorities.
Moreover, this study added a more nuanced conceptualisation of legitimacy by distinguishing
civic society element in the wider ecosystem. This element has strong links with and draws
upon the societal level and the level of individual beliefs. It captures the distinctive missiondriven nature of TSOs compared to either public sector or private sector organisations. With
this, the ecosystem model presented in this thesis not only adopted the PSE framework but
also extended the application of the PSE framework to TSOs rather than public sector
organisations only.
Finally, and although the role of non-profit leaders for their organisations has been recognised
in the previous non-profit literature (e.g., Kearns et al., 2014), this study has not just
embraced the leaders into the model but explicitly considered the personal and professional
beliefs of TSO leaders by showing how they underpin the legitimation processes of TSOs that
they run.
(iv) Making a methodological contribution to the public management literature
The study is one of the first studies to apply the PSE approach as an analytic framework. The
use of PSE as an analytic framework in the analysis of key ecosystem elements and
relationships represents a methodological contribution to the PAM literature. This directly
responds to the call of Osborne et al. (2022) to explore the applicability of the framework in
other contexts and as concerns key organisational processes, such as resource acquisition,
strategic planning, and performance evaluation. This study has explored its import for nonprofit funding and legitimation processes.
248



7.3 Empirical contribution
Empirically the study has shown that legitimacy may be threatened when the service users
are not interested in a service offered to them. Whilst this service might indeed be meeting
their need (e.g., tackling social isolation), it may still generate little engagement of the service
user because the service must be integrated with their prior experiences and expectations to
be valuable to the user (Osborne et al., 2022). The service users are not passive recipients of
the services and like other constituents are involved in active evaluation of organisational
legitimacy (Bitektine, 2011). The key criterion for service users to help them decide whether
to “accept” or “approve” the organisation is the extent to which their pragmatic needs are
met (Connoly and Hyndman, 2017). The lack of user engagement can happen when users
have not been sufficiently consulted in the process of service design.
Following from these empirical contributions, this study therefore recommends finding ways
for active user input. This can not only reduce potential wastage of resources (time, staff, and
funding) but result in more effective interventions. As the empirical evidence has suggested,
user involvement does not necessarily imply a formal representation of the users on the
board of the charity. It may take different forms and be achieved through a variety of means
from subcommittees and focus groups to informal conversations between the staff and the
young people they support. From the perspective of TSO legitimacy, user engagement is one
of the key pillars of their legitimacy and it may be the key criterion for others in their
evaluation of that organisation’s legitimacy. It may therefore be advantageous for TSOs to
consider user views in their decision-making more seriously. Irrespective of how it is
implemented in practice, failure to sufficiently engage with the user to understand their views
can be costly.
Another debate in the literature concerns the use of commercial activities and their impact
on organisational legitimacy of TSOs. This study has obtained empirical evidence of the
supportive role of commercial activities for the three organisations studied (TSS relies on
grants, but actively considers developing a SE activity). Not only does it provide a buffer
against potential losses of other sources of income, but the organisations were shown to be
in greater control of its potential impact on organisational mission compared to other forms
of income. Unlike grants, donations and contracts that often place expectations on
249



organisations and may distort their mission, commercial income has no strings attached. It is
unrestricted, i.e., not tied to a specific purpose or project and it gives TSOs greater autonomy
and freedom to decide how the income should be spent (Dart, 2004). Moreover, the research
suggests that self-support activities are the tools that enhance non-profit legitimacy in the
eyes of the funders because the funders have demonstrated a clear preference for funding
TSOs with diversified income bases. The SE income, thus, can act as a catalyst to obtain other
valued resources, i.e., grants (Gronbjerg, 1991). In saying so, it is, however, important to note
that it is not without problems. Commercial activities are carefully and consciously managed
by the case study organisations. Moreover, they cannot fully substitute all other sources of
income (McKay et al., 2015). As the example of Covid-19 has shown, this income is not stable
either and can disappear within a few days exposing organisations to great financial risks.
Unlike private sector or public sector organisations, TSOs can pursue commercial activities
while maintaining grants and other sources of income in their funding structure and are thus
encouraged to take advantage of their unique position. The study recommends TSOs to
explore possibilities to generate commercial income. While it does not suit every TSO and
may require a certain skill set to be developed, organisations can seek support from the
developed third sector infrastructure in Scotland where there is a number of umbrella
institutions such as Social Enterprise Scotland and Social Enterprise Academy to name a few
that can provide practical advice.
Finally, the study has provided a tool for TSOs to map the ecosystem of their organisations
and explore the elements that contribute to their organisational legitimacy. This can help
establish the relative importance of these elements and identify one or two core elements
that have more legitimising potential than others. Knowing where the strengths are can
support organisational sustainability. This can help focus organisations and save their
resources. This is particularly important in the context of TSOs as they are often constrained
in terms of resources, and the staff often multitask. This can help set priorities and focus the
attention of TSOs on cultivating the elements that have greater legitimising potential.

250



7.4 Policy implications
As the case-studies have demonstrated, public services are indeed increasingly delivered in
networks (Hodgkinson et al., 2017) and include the TSOs themselves, funding bodies,
partners, referral agencies, and service users. Ever since the Hard Edges report was released
in England in 2015 and then in Scotland in 2019, the funders, both public and charitable, have
adjusted their funding processes to include more mechanisms whereby the views of the
community can be acknowledged in the funding application process. For example, the funding
agencies require TSOs to demonstrate how the views of the community have been
considered. Many funders in the sample engage members of the local community or people
with lived experience in the funding allocation decisions. While these represent positive
improvements, there is yet room for improvement which requires a more coordinated
approach.
Much of the current debate in the non-profit literature seems to be about the clash of the
missions between TSOs and these other groups who support the delivery of social services,
including funders, and questions about who has a more legitimate claim to represent the user.
The nature of the debate is rather flawed. Having explored the viewpoints of both the case
study organisations and their funders, it can be said that both parties want to support the
user and exist to fulfil their needs. In some ways they share similar goals and objectives while
the non-profit literature on financing sometimes takes a deterministic view. TSOs are
prescribed to stick to their missions and any mission changes are stigmatised. However, if the
mission changes because the needs change should not be seen as a negative. With respect to
funders, their aims are no less charitable or inferior to those of TSOs. However, the issue is
that changing the funding themes every three to five years as the funders often do is equally
wrong because it does not allow sufficient time for TSOs to tackle an issue at its core. As a
venture philanthropist in the sample has noted, after 10 years of funding the same cause they
still had concerns that the scale of the issue had not been fully addressed and it would quickly
return to the previous level if left unattended.
Rather than arguing whose mission is more important, the different parties involved in
supporting the user should rather consider possibilities of developing a more coordinated
approach to addressing a social issue where each can have unique value-add in the process
251



and where the needs are set by the service users. Public policy can play a role in this process
by facilitating a more coordinated response and bringing together funders, TSOs, local
authorities, communities, and other interested parties to realise common goals and
aspirations.

7.5 Limitations and directions for future research
This study on legitimacy of TSOs aimed to develop a better understanding of legitimacy of
TSOs and explore the processes that underpin their legitimacy. It did so by analysing the
empirical corpus of data provided by four mid-sized Scottish TSOs that deliver a range of
services to young people and have different proportions of several funding sources in their
funding portfolios. Although efforts were made to ensure the empirical setting served to
address the research questions in the most appropriate way, the study is not without its
limitations.
First, even in a multiple case research design there will never be enough cases to allow for
statistical generalisation (Gomm et al., 2000). Accordingly, this research does not claim to
represent the reality of all TSOs that deliver services in Scotland. Moreover, this study focused
on the third sector in Scotland, which is structurally, politically, and ideologically different
from other countries (Hazenberg et al., 2016). However, this does not impact the quality of
the data presented within this thesis. The focus of case studies is on analytical generalisation
(Thomas, 2016), and the exploratory data provided within this thesis can be used
comparatively in future studies of other public services and other geographies outside of
Scotland. Furthermore, the study of untypical research settings, i.e., Scottish “distinctiveness”
of the third sector, can bring to the surface issues that can be hidden in more usual settings
(Hartley, 2004). This study has provided a rich description of the contingencies in which
legitimacy processes occur, which can serve as a good basis to develop and test the ideas
presented in the thesis in other settings.
The present study focused on medium-sized charities and those that deliver services for
young people in Scotland. TSOs, however, differ on a number of characteristics. Accordingly,
future studies can vary these characteristics and extend the study of legitimacy to other non-

252



profit settings and contexts, by including, for example, TSOs of different sizes, supporting
different user groups, and operating in other locations.
Size of an organisation was found to be an important determinant of organisational legitimacy
in previous literature (Ruef and Scott, 1998). The case study organisations are wellestablished and have a long track record, which may have influenced the dynamics of their
legitimation processes while newly established organisations may need to develop a different
set of approaches to enact their legitimacy because they do not have the same level of
credibility as established organisations do (Lounsbury and Glynn, 2001). Furthermore, leaders
in larger organisations may have fewer decision-making powers and their values and beliefs
may play a more marginal role in the legitimation process compared to smaller organisations
where the non-profit leader usually performs several functions (Kearns et al., 2014). In
particular, it could be that the prominence of the sub-micro level is almost exclusively
pertinent to founder-run organisations where the founder is also the CEO and sometimes the
Chair of the board, while for larger organisations the macro level may be more important
because they operate on a larger scale and cover wider geographies. These are all interesting
directions to address in future research.
Furthermore, the case studies included in this research have diversified funding portfolios.
The dynamics of traditional fundraising, grant-making, corporate giving, and contractual
obligations can be quite distinct (Bielefeld, 2002), and thus may impact the nature of
legitimation processes of organisations. For example, in traditional fundraising it is common
to use emotive appeals to encourage individual giving (Clarke, 2001) while service contracts
emphasize targets and measurable outcomes (Taylor and Warburton, 2003). Therefore, an
application of the ecosystem approach to the study of TSOs that are predominantly funded
through one of these mechanisms represents another interesting avenue for research.
Similarly, the conceptual framework and the approaches to legitimation proposed in this
study could be refined by their application to other service contexts and user groups. For
example, further studies can explore how these constructs apply to TSOs where services do
not have as many hedonic components than those offered by the case study organisations or
where services are of less voluntary nature (Strokosch and Osborne, 2020).

253



Due to Covid restrictions the study was limited in terms of the data that could be collected,
but further studies can expand the sources of information within one case and use other data
collection tools to include a wider range of perspectives and constituents. There are yet proxy
measures to capture legitimacy and subsequent studies can adopt existing quantitative
instruments such as surveys to explore the dimensions of organisational legitimacy from
multiple perspectives. In addition, the funders in the survey were sometimes unable to
provide an extensive commentary on the legitimacy of particular organisations because their
staff may have changed. Often, however, funding officers process large volumes of
applications and oversee a large portfolio of funded organisations (which may reach 350
organisations for one funding officer at any point in time). This can influence the depth of
material that can be collected about TSOs. Therefore, it is advisable to use methods other
than interviews to collect data in real time such as observing and tracing every stage of the
funding application process from the funders’ perspective.
In a similar vein, legitimacy is a concept that cannot be directly measured or observed. Hence,
it is not possible to claim causality between the approaches to legitimation identified and the
outcomes perceived and reported by the respondents. Hence, further research should adopt
a longitudinal research design to empirically trace and record the impact that the approaches
used by TSOs have on the outcomes of the legitimation processes.
Finally, it is worth noting that the abductive research strategy adopted in this research
allowed the author to reflect upon the findings emerging from the empirical study and seek
for an appropriate theoretical explanation of the patterns observed (Dubois and Gadde,
2002). In this iterative process the author incorporated several bodies of literature into the
theoretical framework bringing in the contemporary understanding of legitimacy from the
legitimacy literature and the service ecosystem lens from the PAM literature together in this
study. These theories were instrumental in advancing the author’s sensemaking process,
though the choices made also shaped the nature of the analyses conducted. Nevertheless,
the study has presented an approach that allows conceptualising third sector legitimacy in a
novel way, and usefully outlined future research directions to explore, refine, and develop
the framework in other research settings.

254



