Rewriting the Life of an “Ultra-Radical”: Margaret Fuller,
Ralph Waldo Emerson, and Memoirs of Margaret Fuller
Ossoli (1852)



Introduction
In 1845 Margaret Fuller confidently prophesized that “no doubt, a new manifestation
is at hand, a new hour in the day of man” (WNC 10). Inspired by the wave of utopian
and reform movements sweeping the United States and Europe, Fuller believed that
political change was imminent in America. Right from the initial pages of her famous
feminist tract Woman in the Nineteenth Century, she insisted on the need for reform
in the young democracy—“The tree,” Fuller metaphorically explained, “cannot come
to flower till its root be free from the cankering worm, and its whole growth open to
air and light” (WNC 10). Fuller denounced the fact that the American nation was built
on structural inequality and emphasised that “[w]hile any one is base, none can be
entirely free and noble” (WNC 10). As the use of the adjective “noble” suggests, it
seemed inconceivable that a country whose formation had resulted from a revolt
against European monarchies would deny some the right to “citizenship” just as
arbitrarily as kings granted their privileges. At a time when “manifest destiny” was to
become the symbol of the settlers’ advance into the West, Fuller longed for a
different type of “manifestation” and announced that “something new shall presently
be shown of the life of man” (WNC 10). As the title of her work uncompromisingly
indicates, Fuller focused on woman as she juxtaposed to the growing abolitionist
sentiment her own feminist plea—“As men become aware that few men have had a
fair chance, they are inclined to say that no women have had a fair chance” (WNC
12). Fuller’s demand that “inward and outward freedom for woman as much as for
man shall be acknowledged as a right, not yielded as a concession” (WNC 20)
preceded the first women’s rights convention by three years.

2



In order to assert herself as a woman intellectual in antebellum America, Fuller
braved social conventions that kept women confined to the domestic sphere.
Challenging the limitations imposed on her sex, she became a renowned writer,
teacher, conversationalist, and journalist. While her first article appeared in the
Boston Daily Advertiser & Patriot as early as 1834, Fuller spent the last years of her
life reporting from Italy for the New-York Tribune, thus making history as America’s
first female war correspondent. A major figure of American Transcendentalism, she
is known for her literary criticism, her mastery of European literature, as well as for
her socio-political reflections which were majorly informed by her first-hand
experience of the 1848 Italian Revolution, and for her published works on woman.
Unlike the male members of the Transcendental Club and also unlike her brothers,
Fuller did not study at Harvard (although she was the first woman to be granted the
right to use Harvard Library). Instead, she relied on the education she received from
her father Timothy, on her training at schools for girls,1 and on her brilliant work as
an autodidact (learning German by herself and translating Johann Peter
Eckermann’s Gespräche mit Goethe [1839] is only one illustration of her virtuoso
self-education).
Fuller’s Woman was the first book written in America to argue for women's
rights (Gilbert 211). As her friend and fellow Transcendentalist Ralph Waldo
Emerson noted in the posthumous biography Memoirs of Margaret Fuller Ossoli
(1852), Fuller was ahead of her time—“this athletic soul craved a larger atmosphere
than it found; as if she were ill-timed and mis-mated, and felt in herself a tide of life,

1

She attended Cambridge Port Private Grammar School, a school designed to
prepare boys for Harvard that also admitted girls, Dr Park’s Boston Lyceum for
Young Ladies, and Miss Susan Prescott’s Young Ladies’ Seminary in Groton,
Massachusetts.
3



which compared with the slow circulation of others as a torrent with a rill” (1:232).
Through her work and life choices, Fuller refused to conform to a limiting definition of
“womanhood” and, by example, inspired many women to do the same. In 1895, her
former student Caroline Healey Dall recalled how “[m]any of the young women who
grew up with her have since become distinguished. Those who have not, have not
failed to introduce into sacred homes the high ideal that she imparted”
(“Transcendentalism” 35). At the same time, Fuller’s views on “womanhood” were
harshly criticised in the years after her death, as people blamed her for not
conforming to the ideal of femininity of her times. In 1852, the German Reformed
Messenger, a weekly magazine published in Pennsylvania, reported how “her
reading was ill-chosen” and “her education . . . anything but a proper one,”
concluding that Fuller was “what may be termed an ultra-radical in religion, morals
and politics” (“Memoirs of Margaret Fuller Ossoli”). Two years later, The Southern
Literary Messenger depicted Fuller as “one eminently womanly by natural impulse,
but a man by training and philosophy” (“Memoirs of Margaret Fuller Ossoli”). A
central problem in the reception of women intellectuals at the time was in fact the
public’s general inability to see them “as having both feminine sexuality and
‘masculine’ intellect,’” Rula Quawas notes (134). Fuller was also long discredited by
literary critics as a minor figure of Transcendentalism, while the works of male
thinkers like Emerson and Henry David Thoreau elided any form of real interest in
the ones produced by women. In 1964, the author of an article entitled “Emerson and
Christopher Pearse Cranch” declared that the “impact of a man of Emerson’s stature
upon his contemporaries should always interest us” (18). Thanks to the critical
rediscovery of Fuller’s work that began in the 1970s, the “impact of a [woman] of
[Fuller’s] stature upon [her] contemporaries” is now considered as equally important.

4



In a series of articles published since 1982, David M. Robinson established
that “Fuller’s ideas both challenged and extended Emerson’s” as “Transcendentalism
moved from an intensified religious awareness toward a foundation for social and
political reform” (“Alternative” 573). Certainly, as Robinson acknowledged in 2021,
“Transcendentalism has never been easy to describe or define” (“Alternative” 573).
Thomas Wentworth Higginson, a contemporary of Fuller and Emerson, recounted
how the movement originated as a doctrine of religious empowerment that
“amounted essentially to this: that about the year 1836 a number of young people in
America made the discovery that, in whatever quarter of the globe they happened to
be, it was possible for them to take a look at the stars for themselves” (Margaret
133). As Phyllis Cole writes in A Companion to American Literature, “[a]ffirmation of
intuitive thought, questioning of inherited authorities, and recognition of a divinely
charged natural universe must be claimed as central to any description of
Transcendentalism” (67). What’s more, the movement was largely centred on orality
to the point that, according to Lawrence Buell, it “can almost be said to have begun
and ended as a discussion group” (Literary 77). Deemed one of the best
conversationalists in America, Fuller’s famous Conversations in Boston (November
1839–May 1844) perfectly epitomise that all-important dimension. The sessions,
which were dedicated to a female audience with only one series open to men, were
meant to compensate for women’s lack of education, reflecting the
Transcendentalists’ commitment to changing people's lives by changing their minds.
Having taken part in these Conversations, Dall paid tribute to her former
mentor in a lecture entitled “Transcendentalism in New England,” 2 in which she

2 Dall’s lecture was in part a response to a homonymous text by Octavius Brooks

Frothingham (1876). In his “History” of the movement, Frothingham described “Miss
Fuller” as someone who was “thoroughly feminine in her intuitions” (177) and
5



proposed a definition of the movement that seemed particularly aimed at celebrating
women thinkers—“The arc, which we call transcendental, was subtended by a chord,
held at first by Anne Hutchinson, and lost in the Atlantic waves with Margaret Fuller”
(Myerson, Reader 675). Almost fifty years after Fuller’s death, Dall described how
“the history of the Transcendental movement stretched along two hundred years,
beginning with a woman’s life and work in 1637, and ending with a woman’s work
and death in 1850” (Myerson, Reader 675). Although that end date was not taken up
by critics, Robinson admits that “specifying an ending date for Transcendentalism [is]
difficult—the movement seems to have diffused in several directions in the middle
1840s” (“Alternative” 573). And yet what transpires from Dall’s remarks is how eager
she was to reiterate the importance of Fuller’s work amidst the many attempts that
were made to discredit her. After a period of relative critical oblivion and subsequent
reinstatement, we now similarly applaud how works like “The Great Lawsuit: Man
Versus Men. Woman Versus Women” (1843) and its prolongation Woman played a
major role in the history of women’s rights in the U.S. Quoting Fuller’s letter to
William Henry Channing, in which she wrote that she “felt a delightful glow as if I had
put a good deal of my true life in it, as if, suppose I went away now, the measure of
my foot-print would be left on the earth” (FL 3:241), Robinson reasserts with the
advantage of hindsight that “[h]er book, as we now know, has made a lasting
impression” (“Alternative” 586). As we continue to explore the impact of Fuller’s work
on the history of feminism (first and second wave), and as we focus more and more
on Emerson’s rare instances of position-taking on the question of women’s rights, it
is important that we turn our attention to Memoirs of Margaret Fuller Ossoli—the

ascertained that the “only criticism that can fairly be made on the Transcendentalist’s
idea of woman, is that it has more . . . respect for the ideal woman than for the actual
woman” (181).
6



posthumous biography of Fuller edited and co-written by Emerson right after her
death—in order to further investigate the way(s) in which Fuller’s and Emerson’s
different understandings of womanhood impacted their views of society and of the
American nation. This thesis provides an original outlook on Fuller’s and Emerson’s
Transcendentalism(s) by placing Memoirs at its centre. Focusing on Emerson’s
chapters “Visits to Concord” and “Conversations in Boston,” I shall address the
following questions: did Fuller and Emerson agree on a common definition of
“womanhood”? How did Emerson portray Fuller in Memoirs, and what does that tell
us about his views on women’s rights? How did their considerations on gender
reflect on their Transcendentalist philosophy and on their political thinking?
It was Horace Greeley, editor of the New-York Tribune, who encouraged
Fuller to expand “The Great Lawsuit” into a book while also inviting her to move to
New York to become the Tribune’s literary editor. It was also Greeley who, in much
more tragic circumstances, urged Emerson to write a biography of Fuller after she
died in July 1850. In August that year, he asked Emerson to work on “a proper
edition of Margaret’s works, with extracts from her unprinted writings which were the
freest and most characteristic of any” (EL 4:225). Fuller died on July 19th, in a
shipwreck just fifty yards off Fire Island, New York, along with her two-year old son
Angelino and her husband Giovanni Angelo Ossoli. A somewhat criminal lack of
rescue efforts characterised the accident: as recalled by a witness, “the men on
shore had not courage enough to launch the lifeboat–they might have launched
without risk of life,” instead they “sat for an hour or two on the side of the boat, doing
nothing” (Davis). Thoreau, sent out by Emerson to search the scene the day after the
shipwreck, deploringly announced that neither Fuller’s body, nor her book—the
history of the Italian Revolutions of 1848–49 that she called her “masterpiece”—were

7



anywhere to be found. Had Fuller’s “masterpiece” been recovered, perhaps her
reputation would have followed a very different trajectory in the century following her
death. An authoritative text like a history of the Italian Revolutions might in fact have
sealed Fuller’s status as a major Transcendentalist and hushed those who attacked
her for her views on women’s rights. Instead, after Fuller’s premature death (she was
only forty years old), the radicalism of some of her written work, particularly her 1843
essay and Woman, as well as her unconventional marriage with the Marquis Ossoli,
continued to pose a serious threat to her posthumous reputation. In fact, even
among Fuller’s most intimate friends, her marriage had caused some concern. Less
than a month after Fuller’s death, Emerson wrote in a letter to Thomas Carlyle that
he believed Fuller would have struggled to fit in now that she was joined by her
Italian husband for “[h]er marriage would have taken her away from us all” (EL
8:224).
In Emerson’s Memory Loss, Christopher Hanlon remarks that it is partly in
order “to legitimize” her that Emerson started working on a biography of Fuller,
“whose unorthodox marriage . . . and resulting child Angelo produced an atmosphere
of scandal the Memoirs was intended to quell” (49). After Fuller’s tragic death,
Emerson immediately started working on a tribute for he believed that such “opulent
genius deserves a fluent eulogy” (EL 4:253). With the help of Fuller’s close friends
William Henry Channing and James Freeman Clarke, he attempted to secure her
posterity and recover her life and work in Memoirs of Margaret Fuller Ossoli, which
was published in 1852 by Phillips, Sampson and Company. As suggested by
Emerson’s comment “Margarets book has had the most unlooked for & welcome
success” (EL 8:224), Memoirs did very well at the time of its publication. Thomas R.
Mitchell indicates that “the first 1,000 copies sold within 24 hours. Before the year

8



ended, the two-volume edition had been reprinted 4 times, by 1884 11 times” (212).
And yet in recent years, despite remaining a reference for biographical accounts of
Fuller, Memoirs elicited a lot of criticism from scholars who regarded it as reductive
and therefore unreliable. While Higginson, in his own 1884 biography of Fuller,
acknowledged the complexity of her character, noting that she was indeed “many
women in one” (4), Emerson, Channing, and Clarke struggled to come to terms with
Fuller’s controversial radicalism and chose to depict only some aspects of her life.
For Cole, “Fuller scholars have been justifiably critical of these friends’ editorial
mangling of her manuscripts not only changing words but cutting actual pages of her
journals so as to delete and rearrange as they wished” (Companion 80). Indeed, the
editors’ efforts to contain Fuller’s reputation resulted in what Sonia Di Loreto has
described as “a ruthless cut and paste of fragments of letters sent or received by
Fuller, pieces of her writings, and quotations from other works” (11). Commenting on
the biographical reductionism at work in Memoirs, Bell Gale Chevigny noted that
“where Fuller’s individuality seemed to threaten deep-seated cultural, social, and
political norms of femininity, the editors tempered or obscured” (“Censorship” 451).
Journal entries and private correspondence by the authors of Memoirs show
that writing the biography was not a straightforward process: in a letter to William H.
Furness, Emerson recounted how he had “just escaped from a task that has
absorbed near six months, a labor of love, but of very questionable judgment, Margaret Fuller's memoirs” (Fruitlands). In addition to the complex gathering of
Fuller’s papers, disseminated all over New England and Europe, working on
Memoirs involved reading some of her very intimate accounts: the “experience could
be uncomfortable,” as Susan Manning remarked in Poetics of Character (173).
James Freeman Clarke indeed confessed that “[t]he difficulty which we all feel in

9



describing our past intercourse and friendship with Margaret Fuller, is, that the
intercourse was so intimate, and the friendship so personal, that it is like making a
confession to the public of our most interior selves” (MMFO 1:61). On top of issues
of privacy, there was the even bigger problem of Fuller’s posthumous reputation of
which, as Manning noted, “the memoir . . . took pre-emptive control” (105). When
confronted with the question of how and what to tell the public about her, the authors
of Memoirs struggled to deal with Fuller’s private and public life. First, there was the
uncertainty surrounding her union with Ossoli, which was particularly troubling
because the news of a child born out of wedlock could destroy her reputation. Her
writings on women’s rights could equally turn her into an easy target in midnineteenth century America.
Unfortunately, the decades following Fuller’s death showed just how fragile
the reputation of a woman intellectual like Fuller could be. In his article on “Julian
Hawthorne and the ‘Scandal’ of Margaret Fuller,” Mitchell pinpoints that “[a]fter 1884
Memoirs of Margaret Fuller Ossoli . . . would not be reprinted until 1973” (213).
Similarly, “Fuller’s Woman in the Nineteenth Century, in its twelfth printing in 1884,
would be reprinted only once more (1893) before its revival in 1969” (213). As
Mitchell recounts, 1884 was a great year for Fuller’s admirers—two new biographies
were published, Higginson’s Margaret Fuller Ossoli and Julia Ward Howe’s Margaret
Fuller (Marchesa Ossoli). Indicating that “Fuller’s reputation seemed secure three
decades after her death” (212), Mitchell quotes further evidence—Fuller’s “brother
Arthur's edited collections of her work, At Home and Abroad (1856) and Life Without
and Life Within (1859), had been reissued 10 and 4 times, respectively; of her
Summer on the Lakes in 1843, [Evert Augustus] Duyckinck in his private diary had
written that it was the most genuinely American book that he had ever read,” and in

10



“1868, Horace Greeley had devoted an entire chapter to Fuller in his autobiography,
Recollections of a Busy Life” (212). And yet, when Nathaniel and Sophia
Hawthorne’s son Julian published his father’s journals, he purposefully and
successfully degraded Fuller’s image by including an entry in which Hawthorne had
recorded the derogatory remarks that American sculptor Joseph Mozier had made
about Fuller. Mitchell explains that “Fuller’s sudden devaluation in the very year that
promised to raise her literary and historical currency was, in fact, part of Julian’s
strategy to strengthen his father’s position as a celebrated American author” (213).
As his notes reveal, Julian Hawthorne was terrified of what the women’s rights
movement might do to “married women, who had in their husbands their ideal of
marital virtue, and whose domestic affairs sufficiently occupied them, were not likely
to be cordial supporters of such doctrines as the book enunciated” (qtd. in Mitchell
226).
The “devaluation” of Fuller’s work, which eventually resulted in a century-long
underappreciation of her genius, finally came to an end in the 1970s when Fuller’s
name started to emerge from neglect. Chevigny, author of the foundational work The
Woman and the Myth: Margaret Fuller’s Life and Writings (1976), describes how
second-wave feminism played a defining role in her wanting to bring Fuller’s work
back to life. Commenting on the state of the archives in the 1990s, Christina Zwarg,
another major voice in the critical resurrection of Fuller, recounted how she “indulged
in resentful comparisons between the haphazard condition of Fuller's works and the
fastidious order of Emerson's papers (both published and private) at Harvard”
(“Review” 132). In a review of Charles Capper’s Margaret Fuller: An American
Romantic Life (1993), Zwarg notes how “[e]ven tracking down Fuller's published
writing takes considerable effort” and “Capper is much more modest than he needs

11



to be about the formidable task he set before himself when he embarked on this
project” (“Review” 132). In 2022, things are looking different: not only is Fuller’s
written work now widely available, but for the first time a Collected Writings of
Margaret Fuller is going to be published. Since the critical reevaluation of Fuller’s
work began, a large part of her writings has been reprinted in a series of important
collections, starting with Robert Hudspeth’s 1983 The Letters of Margaret Fuller (six
volumes, published by Cornell University Press). Quoted earlier, Chevigny’s The
Woman and the Myth juxtaposes excerpts from Fuller’s works with texts written by
her contemporaries; edited by Larry J. Reynolds and Susan Belasco Smith, “These
Sad but Glorious Days”: Dispatches from Europe, 1846-1850 (1991) features Fuller’s
pieces from Europe for the Tribune; in 1998, Reynolds also edited a Norton edition of
Woman in the Nineteenth Century; published in 2000, and edited by Judith Mattson
Bean and Joel Myerson, Critic: Writings from the New-York Tribune, 1844-1846
focuses on Fuller’s New-York journalism; in the same year, Transcendentalism: A
Reader by Myerson also appeared, featuring key texts by Fuller including some of
her Dial articles and, more recently, Myerson also edited Fuller in her Own Time
(2008), a collection of first-hand reminiscences written by her contemporaries.
Although Zwarg’s comments about the state of the archives are now dated,
they do invite us to reflect critically on the posterity of nineteenth-century authors like
Fuller and Emerson. Both central figures of the Transcendental movement, Fuller
and Emerson were not only intimate friends, but they were also part of the same
national conversation that characterised antebellum America, whereby writers and
thinkers attempted to redefine the very terms of national belonging. However, while
Emerson’s fame continued more or less uninterrupted after his death, Fuller was
relegated for quite some time to the margins of the Transcendentalist circle.

12



Although she was eventually brought back by critics and scholars, the fluctuating
curve of her popularity tracks with the similarly wavering reception of nineteenthcentury female intellectuals. Indeed, until the second half of the twentieth century,
critical overviews of American literature identified Emerson and Thoreau as key
figures of American Transcendentalism. Scholars and biographers also tended to
mention Ellery Channing, his nephew William Henry Channing, Theodore Parker,
and George Ripley as influential figures within that movement; but far less did such
studies recognise key roles played by women Transcendentalists—intellectuals who
were omitted from anthologies and syllabi, left aside of the academic canon where
their writings were largely forgotten. Though Fuller proved an exception to this trend,
most scholarship focused for a long time upon her life rather than her work, a trend
that is “not exactly news in the history of women's struggle to gain acceptance for
their achievements,” as noted by Belasco Smith (“Animating”). This tendency toward
biographical rather than critical treatments of women such as Fuller gave way in the
1960s and 70s, as academics like Chevigny, Zwarg, and Capper worked for the
critical reinstatement of Margaret Fuller. With Fuller’s writings more easily available,
more and more critical works were published on Fuller, including several new
biographies—Capper’s two volumes An American Romantic Life: The Private Years
(1993) and The Public Years (2007), John Matteson’s The Lives of Margaret Fuller
(2012), and Megan Marshall’s Margaret Fuller: An American Life (2013), winner of
the 2014 Pulitzer Prize. The rediscovery of Fuller’s work contributed to the
enlargement of the Transcendentalist canon by adding a more political dimension to
our understanding of the movement. In recent years, scholars also developed
analyses of other women who played an active role in the Transcendentalist circle:
Cole has written extensively on Mary Moody Emerson in Mary Moody Emerson and

13



The Origins of Transcendentalism: A Family History, Tiffany K. Wayne’s monograph
Woman Thinking: Feminism and Transcendentalism in Nineteenth-Century America
(2005) shed light on works by Paulina Wright Davis, Elizabeth Oakes Smith, and
Ednah Dow Cheney amongst others, while the more recent collection of essays
edited by Jana L. Argersinger and Phyllis Cole Towards a Female Genealogy of
Transcendentalism (2014) similarly aimed to bring some of these women’s works
back to critical attention after a long period of oblivion.
Although Fuller is only now, belatedly, coming into her own as a major figure
in U.S. literary history, her friendship with Emerson never stopped eliciting the
curiosity of commentators. And yet whenever their contemporaries tried to define
their relationship, they would often reach the conclusion that it was as complex and
hard to pin down as were the minds of the two thinkers. Emerson himself once wrote
to Fuller, “It seems as if we had been born & bred in different nations. You say you
understand me wholly. You cannot communicate yourself to me. I hear the words
sometimes but remain a stranger to your state of mind” (EL 2:353). Howe’s
comments in her 1883 biography of Fuller similarly emphasise the friends’
temperamental differences, “Mr. Emerson served only to display her powers, his
uncompromising idealism seeming narrow and hard when contrasted with her
glowing realism” (114). Although we might suppose that Howe, while writing Fuller’s
biography, became a little biased in her judgement of Emerson, her comments are
also echoed in Higginson’s biographical work. Indeed, Higginson did “not think that
Mr. Emerson, with his cool and tranquil temperament, always did quite justice to the
ardent nature that flung itself against him” (300). Commenting on Memoirs of
Margaret Fuller Ossoli, he criticised the way in which Emerson, Clarke, and
Channing had chosen to depict Fuller, noting that “the prevalent tone of the

14



‘Memoirs’ leaves her a little too much in the clouds” (5). Higginson used Memoirs as
a foil to define what he would not do in his biography—“With every disposition to
defer to the authors of the ‘Memoirs,’ all of whom have been in one way or another
my friends and teachers, I am compelled in some cases to go with what seems the
preponderance of written evidence against their view” (4). Modern critics have
similarly acknowledged Memoirs’ heavy mediation. Examining the Fuller-Emerson
relationship in Poetics of Character, Manning described “the neutering biography
produced by Margaret Fuller’s friends Emerson, Channing and Clarke” as “their
attempt to kill off her continuing intellectual potency by memorialising her: embalming
her inconvenient energies in a controlled version of the life-story they made poetic
justice of an untimely death” (225). Hudspeth, working on his collection of Fuller’s
letters in the 1980s, deplored the “physical abuse” undergone by the material used
for the composition of Memoirs—“letters have whole paragraphs blotted by gobs of
purple ink; other letters are cut into halves or quarters; editorial changes are written
over Fuller’s writing” (1:63). The following analysis of Memoirs will provide an
original outlook about the way in which the biography has been read by attending to
Emerson’s relationship with Fuller at the level of his editorial changes. By viewing
Emerson’s rewriting of Fuller’s life as a symptom of his views on womanhood, I shall
consider the biography, but also Fuller and Emerson’s friendship, as well as their
Transcendentalism(s), through the prism of gender.
The Fuller-Emerson relationship has been at the centre of attention of
numerous important critical studies, many of which relied on Memoirs as an
important biographical resource, while also commenting on Emerson’s strange
portrayal of his friend. In her 2013 monograph Poetics of Character, Manning
asserted that the “personal friendship between Emerson and Fuller was briefer and

15



more intense than Emerson’s relationship with Carlyle” (169). Manning read the
correspondence between the two friends as a story of momentary
miscommunications that kept them further apart than the ocean that would later
stand between them—“[s]ome form of translation, Emerson implied, was required
between their idioms for the friendship to be realised” (170). Character differences
and the weight of nineteenth-century constrictive gender norms certainly added
layers of complication to Fuller and Emerson’s relationship. While Fuller’s
commitment to women’s rights grew stronger and stronger throughout the years,
Emerson’s ideas on woman evolved in a different way. Armida Gilbert, in a chapter
entitled “Emerson in the Context of the Woman’s Rights Movement,” describes how
when he gave his first address on “Woman” in 1855, Emerson “had come far since
the 1830s, when he had attempted to understand gender differences by means of
such superficial and unlikely distinctions as ‘the man loves hard wood, the woman
loves pitch pine’” (234). Memoirs was published three years before Emerson spoke
at the Woman’s Rights Convention on 20 September 1855: this thesis shall
interrogate his (questionable) editorial choices in Memoirs by viewing them in
relation to the evolution of his thought on the woman question.
In the first critical work ever devoted to the famous friendship, Feminist
Conversations: Fuller, Emerson, and the Play of Reading (1995), Zwarg examined
the influence that Fuller had on her immediate surroundings. As she wrote in an
earlier piece published in 1988, “critics [had] staunchly resisted Emerson’s feminist
orientation despite his intimate relationship with the stunning feminist Margaret
Fuller. No one seriously examined Fuller’s influence over Emerson because the
assumption even among feminist critics was that Emerson held sway over Fuller”
(“Scene” 133). In her 1995 monograph, Zwarg showed how Emerson “cherished

16



[Fuller’s] feminist perspective but also how he eventually came to rely on a feminist
reader for his work” (32). Zwarg’s foundational work details the ways in which
Fuller’s feminism shaped Emerson’s understanding of life; “Fuller’s unconventional
experience as a woman,” Zwarg notes, “enabled her to remind Emerson through her
complex alignment with masculine activity that one’s sex, though seemingly fatal in
nature, need not to be restrictive in life” (33). Other critics have questioned that
positive influence: just as Leslie Elizabeth Eckel explains in “Gender,” Emerson’s
“theories of women’s strength may not have matched his practical efforts to promote
feminist causes” (193). Eckel also summarises the critical debate by reminding
readers that “[s]cholars are split on this point: Armida Gilbert argues Emerson was
‘extremely radical’ in his activism on behalf of women’s rights, but Cole maintains he
was far more conservative than Fuller, her fellow ‘Exaltadas,’ and other men in his
circle” (“Gender” 193). Gilbert is indeed convinced that “[w]hile [Emerson’s]
arguments, influenced by Fuller, were couched like hers in the essentialist
nineteenth-century language of sacred womanhood, gentility, and intuitive
superiority, his political demands on behalf of woman were as bold as hers” (234). In
“Emerson’s Hero: Mentoring Margaret Fuller” (Emerson’s Protégés, 2014), David
Dowling similarly depicts Emerson as someone whose works “heralded the powers
intrinsic to women and urged them to bloom into heroic proportions,” as in his lecture
“Heroism” (40). Commenting on Emerson’s influence on Fuller, Dowling also
reasserts Emerson’s position as Fuller’s mentor noting how the “principle of selfreliance and the critique of institutional corruption, materialism, and social injustice at
the core of Emersonian transcendentalism equipped her with an outlook ideally
suited to her position as literary editor” (34).

17



Julie Ellison’s Delicate Subjects: Romanticism, Gender, and the Ethics of
Understanding (1990) reads like an attempt to recalibrate that debate, as she asserts
that “Fuller would have been Fuller without Emerson” (220). Ellison states that “the
reverse is also true, despite the fact that Emerson's unsettling friendship with Fuller
was far more unique in his experience than hers” (Delicate 220). Indeed, she
suggests that “[d]espite the extraordinary interest of her relationship with Emerson –
remarkable in the nuances of attraction, repulsion, self-revelation, and competitive
understanding recorded by both parties – he is not as crucial to her development as
most accounts of either Emerson or Fuller would have us believe” (Delicate 220).
According to Ellison, “Fuller's Transcendentalist phase is viewed as something she
outgrew, [and] it is also treated as something she grew into, in the late 1830s, as a
result of the influence of Emerson” (220): for the purpose of my analysis of Memoirs
however, Fuller and Emerson’s friendship remains crucial and so are their
exchanges and the way in which they influenced each other. Arguably the first to do
so, Zwarg devoted a full article to Memoirs in 1988: in “Emerson as ‘Mythologist,’”
she argued that Emerson “defuse[d] the radical nature of Fuller's life” (217) in order
to protect her from the judgement of her own era. Zwarg claims that calling Fuller
“unattractive” was part of a larger strategy that Emerson employed to “temporarily
[suspend] that problem for his intended reader—and . . . to make the more important
and seemingly gender-free idea that Fuller had more ‘personal influence’ than ‘any
person’ he ever knew” (“Mythologist” 219-220).
Phyllis Cole, another major voice in Fuller scholarship, is less “optimistic”
about Memoirs and Emerson’s take on gender. In 1997, Cole stated that “America’s
foremost prophet of originality constantly recorded, echoed, and colonized the words
of others around him” (“Conversing” 128). Pointing out that the “Emersonian ‘Man

18



Thinking’ really is male, even if he counts women among his sources” (129), Cole
nevertheless acknowledged that Emerson offered a “rhetoric of possibility” as he
“invite[d] women into the prospects of the Phi Beta Kappa address” (“Conversing”
158). In a later piece on “Woman Questions: Emerson, Fuller, and New England
Reform” (1999), she reasserted that there were “genuine differences between
Emerson and Fuller” (419) for “[d]espite a common interest in women’s power of
knowledge, their conclusions about women differed as widely as their conclusions
about evil” (419). Cole has produced a number of influential analyses of Fuller’s
work, focusing less on Emerson and more on Fuller’s ground-breaking use of the law
trope to advance her feminist claim (“Fuller’s Lawsuit and Feminist History” in
Margaret Fuller and Her Circles). Cole’s research importantly and uniquely
“compound[s] the case for a feminized Emerson [cf Zwarg], bracketing the Fuller
dialogue with an almost half-century (1812-1850) conversation by letter and by
journal with Mary Moody Emerson” (“Woman Questions” 411)—a dialogue which, as
Cole remarks, Emerson only took up so far. She notes in fact that, though the “two
women hardly met each other, . . . Waldo’s characterizations of them sounded
common themes for years thereafter” (“Woman Questions” 411) and, although he
was full of admiration for the two exceptional thinkers, “in the private record of his
journal he meanwhile recorded darker thoughts about women” (413). Showing great
reverence to previous scholarship, Hanlon’s 2017 monograph entitled Emerson’s
Memory Loss put Memoirs at the heart of his argument, viewing it as a cathartic
moment of self-introspection during which Emerson was able to develop his views on
abolitionism while thinking of “Emerson’s affective history as key to his politics” (52).
For Hanlon, “the shift in Emerson’s affective politics . . . has much to do with his
reconsideration of Fuller’s charge that he had failed her as a friend” (82): Hanlon

19



utilizes Memoirs in a wholly new way by claiming innovatively that the “process of
conjuring Fuller after her death–attempting to bring her near again through the
enjoined project of recollection that is the Memoirs of Margaret Fuller Ossoli—
becomes Emerson’s own way of negotiating distance and propinquity in Fuller’s
rather than ‘Friendship’’s way” (65). In the 1841 essay, rather than equating
friendship to a “communion of souls,” Emerson stated that he “embrace[d] solitude”
(CW 2:114), an approach which Fuller had criticised and defined “cold.” Hanlon
argues that Memoirs offered Emerson the opportunity to view his relationship with
Fuller through her eyes, rather than his. Commenting on the titles of the sections that
form Emerson’s chapters in Memoirs, Hanlon explains that “it is as if Fuller’s shifting
whereabouts now mirror the attempts of her friends to map the career of what it is
they have lost in her” (65).
While in the last thirty years critics have sought to demonstrate that Fuller’s
radical feminist ideas did influence Emerson, either shaping his views on
womanhood as Zwarg argues in Feminist Conversations or forging his abolitionism
as demonstrated by Hanlon, I believe that Memoirs actually represents a step back
from that kind of progressive conversation. In the 1850s, Emerson often used
Memoirs as a reason—or maybe an excuse—not to appear publicly at women’s
rights conventions. In 1850, “Emerson was prevented from attending the convention,
his absence was due to his deep involvement in editing the Memoirs of Margaret
Fuller Ossoli, which, as Howe paraphrased Emerson, ‘he hoped, would be
considered as service in the line of the objects of the meeting’”3 (qtd. in Gilbert 212).
The following year, in letter to Lucy Stone which appeared in the New-York Daily
Tribune on 17 October, Emerson apologised for being unable to attend that year's

3 Howe, Reminiscences, p. 158.

20



Worcester Woman's Rights Convention and explained that he was “tied fast at home
by a task which will not end until after a fortnight,” i.e. the memoirs (7). I believe that
an in-depth analysis of Emerson’s portrayal of Fuller in Memoirs is required to see
through the veracity of these comments and to better understand his thoughts on
gender. Precisely because Memoirs is a highly mediated text, this thesis considers it
alongside works by Fuller and other authors so that half of my analysis provides
context for what was often distorted in first-person accounts. As well as exploring
texts by women thinkers like Lydia Maria Child, Sophia Ripley, and Harriet
Martineau, I will also examine Fuller’s writing in relation to the work of male
Transcendentalists like Emerson, Thoreau, William Henry Channing, and James
Freeman Clarke.
This thesis is built along a series of close readings, in which my exploration of
Memoirs is compounded by analyses of other texts and authors: while its overall
structure is reflective of the multi-faceted approach that the exploration of Memoirs
requires, chapters are built as cohesive units and they are organized as follows. In
Chapter One, entitled “Emerson and Fuller in Conversation: On Friendship,
Womanhood, and Poetry,” I look at Emerson’s and Fuller’s different definition(s) of
womanhood. Their relationship has been at the centre of many important scholarly
studies on which I rely, but their friendship was also articulated on a series of
discussions on gender (woman, marriage, man’s duties) on which I wish to focus.
Looking into what made their understandings of womanhood different from each
other, I examine how that impacted their friendship while also discussing how other
Transcendentalists reacted to that conversation. First, I analyse how the dichotomy
between “ideal” and “real” womanhood pervades Emerson’s and Fuller’s discussions
on gender, but also how it defines the way in which he describes Fuller in Memoirs.

21



While Emerson’s 1841 essay “Friendship” often dominates critical discussions of his
relationship with Fuller (Hanlon also relies on it to comment on Emerson’s account of
that relationship in Memoirs), I look at the notion of friendship through Fuller’s eyes.
Indeed, in the second section of the chapter, I focus on her analysis of the BrentanoGünderode relationship in “Bettine Brentano and her Friend Günderode” (published
in the Dial in 1842) and reflect on how Fuller’s idealisation of the friendship between
the two artists provides an interesting foil to Emerson’s portrayal of Fuller as a
woman intellectual in Memoirs. Thirdly, I concentrate on Sophia Ripley’s essay
“Woman,” which was published in the Dial in 1841, and examine how Ripley’s
redefinition of the concept of “real” womanhood, inspired by Fuller, relates to the
image of womanhood which transpires from Emerson’s descriptions of Fuller in
Memoirs.
In “Rewriting the Life of an ‘Ultra-Radical,’” the second chapter of the thesis, I
focus on Emerson’s editorial practices and choices in Memoirs. I interrogate his
contradictory approach to the task of compiling the biography itself, which he
described as “an essential line of American history” while also complaining about
having to spend time writing it. I compare it with Clarke’s and Channing’s reflections
on the act of writing Memoirs, looking at how they dealt with the notion of Fuller’s
reputation and analysing how Channing manipulated the issue of Fuller’s marriage
so that it would suit the biography’s agenda. Secondly, I examine Fuller’s
unpublished 1844 journal fragments, held by the Trustees of Reservations, which I
argue offer an insight into parts of Fuller’s individuality that were left out by the
authors of Memoirs (and by Emerson more particularly, who was in charge of
narrating that period of Fuller’s life). In the third section of the chapter, I concentrate
on the “woman or artist” dilemma, which Emerson directly confronts in an

22



eponymous section of Memoirs, and on which I rely to discuss the various
manoeuvres used to conform Fuller to a conventional and domestic image of
womanhood. In Chapter Three, entitled “The Body Element in Memoirs of Margaret
Fuller Ossoli,” I examine the causes and the consequences of Emerson’s editorial
practices, questioning the political implications of Emerson’s choices in Memoirs.
Viewing Memoirs as Emerson’s first public response to women’s rights, I look at the
biography in relation to his rather ambivalent career as a women’s rights supporter.
Emerson’s rewriting of Fuller’s life in Memoirs shows the limitations of his
understanding of womanhood and explains, I believe, why his engagement with the
women’s rights movement was so tentative. Likening Emerson’s memorialisation of
Fuller to the practice of embalmment, I explore the ways in which the body, a notion
that held a very different meaning for Fuller and for Emerson, becomes the vehicle of
a certain conservatism on Emerson’s behalf which stands in stark contrast with
Fuller’s transcendent understanding of the (female) body. I argue that that is
particularly apparent in Emerson’s treatment of Fuller’s interest in mesmerism in
Memoirs, which I analyse in the second section of the chapter. Mesmerism, also
known as animal magnetism, was a protoscience in which Fuller developed a keen
interest while seeking a cure for the chronic pain she sustained all her life. In
Memoirs, Emerson criticises Fuller’s fascination with mesmerism, as well as with
other esoteric practices, discarding her faith in bodily intuition as an obstacle to the
intellect and describing it as an eminently feminine attribute. Such an embodied
vision of womanhood also pervades Emerson’s notebook “Margaret Fuller Ossoli,” a
journal that he kept during the composition of Memoirs and which I examine in this
chapter, reflecting on the textual mutilations undergone by the body of Fuller’s text
which Emerson transcribed in the notebook as well as on the sexist characterisations

23



that Emerson wrote in it. Thirdly, in the last section of the chapter, I look at the
history of Emerson’s support of the women’s rights movement, as I link his tentative
support for the cause with the limited image of womanhood that emerges from his
portrayal of Fuller in Memoirs.

24



Chapter One – Emerson and Fuller in Conversation: On
Friendship, Womanhood, and Poetry

Introduction – The Problem of Fuller’s
Reputation
Narrating the life of an “ultra-radical” (German Reformed Messenger) mustn’t have
been an easy task. When Emerson, Channing, and Clarke undertook the project of
writing a “Life of Margaret” (EL 4:222) in 1850, they were indeed confronted with the
problem of Fuller’s reputation. Before we begin our analysis of Memoirs, it might be
best to try and understand what that reputation looked like in 1852, when the
biography was published. It might also be useful to pick a definition of “reputation”
that sits chronologically closer to our Transcendentalist protagonists than the one we
might have in mind today. In Vindication of the Rights of Woman published in 1792,
Mary Wollstonecraft defined “reputation” as a concept that totally depended on
gender, and which was firmly linked to sexuality (in a woman’s case).
Wollstonecraft bitterly remarked that “with respect to reputation, the attention is
confined to a single virtue – chastity” (311). The lucidity of Wollstonecraft’s criticism
is astounding for her time, as is her appeal to recognise the ubiquitousness of
sexuality in society’s judgment of womanhood—“If the honour of a woman, as it is
absurdly called, is safe, she may neglect every social duty; nay, ruin her family by
gaming and extravagance; yet still present a shameless front – for truly she is an
honourable woman!” (311-312). Quoting Swiss philosopher Jean-Jacques
Rousseau, Wollstonecraft also pinpointed that man’s reputation was of a completely
different nature, for it was precisely by challenging society’s opinion that a man could

25



be seen as truly “manly”—“A man . . . secure in his own good conduct, depends
only on himself, and may brave the public opinion; but a woman, in behaving well,
performs but half her duty” (302). Strategically juxtaposing to her own critique the
authoritative voice of a male philosopher, Wollstonecraft denounced the fact that
“[o]pinion is the grave of virtue among the men; but its throne among women” (303).
The act of recounting the life of a woman thinker like Fuller, who “often amazed
people by a cold and unexpected dissent from the commonplaces of popular
acceptation” (MMFO 1:96), was inevitably going to be entangled with notions of
“opinion” and “virtue,” for it was in these terms that women were viewed and judged.
It is therefore not surprising that sexuality—and more specifically, the question of
Fuller’s marriage—played a decisive role in the way in which the three authors
approached the task of writing Memoirs.

(Fig. 1) “Married perhaps in Oct, Nov, or Dec.” Margaret Fuller Ossoli, 1851. Ralph Waldo Emerson
Journals and Notebooks, MS Am 1280H, (111), Volume: 96. Houghton Library.

The blurred circumstances of Fuller’s private life posed a major challenge to
her biographers. As shown by a note in Emerson’s journal (which he kept while
working on Memoirs [see figure 1]), the question of her marriage was on their minds
from the onset of the project. While in Italy, Fuller had shared very little information
about her private life with her friends and family in America. As Fuller explained in a
letter to her sister Ellen, she was afraid she would be the target of judgement and
criticism when back in her native country—“I expect that to many of my friends Mr

26



Emerson for one, [Ossoli] will be nothing, and they will not understand that I should
have life in common with him” (FL 5:291). Consequently, in 1849, only a few of her
friends knew about her relationship with Ossoli or about the fact that she had given
birth to their child, Angelo Eugene Philip (“Nino”) in September 1848. The nature of
Fuller’s union with Giovanni Angelo Ossoli remains a mystery today: although Ossoli
is everywhere referred to as her “husband,” we are only partly confident that
Giovanni and Margaret were in fact married. Two of Fuller’s most recent biographies,
Megan Marshall’s Margaret Fuller: A New American Life (2014) and John Matteson’s
The Lives of Margaret Fuller (2012), both establish that, although probable, Fuller’s
marriage cannot be determined with certainty nor pinned down to a specific moment
in time. The wedding certificate was never found, and there is no real mention of a
specific wedding date (nor is there any trace of it in Italian official registers). Just as
Wollstonecraft anticipated when she wrote about “virtue” and “opinion,” the most
problematic aspect of Fuller and Ossoli’s union in the 1850s was the question of
whether they had married before the conception of their child. Today, we can only
speculate, and critics have for now opted for a “no”; that is that Nino was conceived
out of wedlock and that the couple married in April 1848 when Fuller was already
pregnant. Recently discovered, the certificate of Nino’s baptism, which expressly
refers to “the married Mr. Giovanni Angelo of Marquis Ossoli from Rome and Mrs.
Margaret Fuller heterodox from America” (Matteson, Lives 357-358) is the most
compelling existing piece of evidence that the marriage really happened. That said,
as Chevigny writes, it all depends “on believing that Margaret and Giovanni and
those around her never told an expedient lie. . . . my findings were more ambiguous,
and I remain persuaded that the only truth we can establish is that this remarkable

27



woman would have had enormously complex feelings about the issue” (“Forty Years”
266).
For decades, Fuller’s private life outshone her work, which is “not exactly
news in the history of women's struggle to gain acceptance for their achievements”
as noted by Susan Belasco Smith (“Transcending” 23). And although that is no
longer the case today, it is nevertheless important that we reflect on how powerfully
those life events impacted the way in which Fuller was perceived by mid-nineteenth
century society. In Emerson’s Memory Loss, Hanlon identifies the marriage as one of
the main causes of concern for the authors of Memoirs. The very title of Memoirs
(i.e. the addition of “Ossoli” to Fuller’s maiden name) is a good initial indication of the
stance Fuller’s biographers chose to adopt when confronted with the uncertainty of
her marital status. It is however important to remark that although they chose to
publicly assume she was married, they did not totally rename Fuller; in the letters
she wrote from Italy, she had indeed asked her correspondents to address her as
the “Marchesa Ossoli.” Writing to Costanza Arconati Visconti in October 1849, she
justified her request and explained that although “it seems to me silly for a radical
like me, to be carrying a title[,] . . . while Ossoli is in his native land, it seems
disjoining myself from him not to bear it” (FL 5:270). Fuller equated nobility with the
Old World and thought that when “O[ssoli] dropt the title, it would be a suitable
moment in becoming an inhabitant of republican America” (FL 5:270). Just as
Fuller’s reflection was political, the authors’ decision to include her married name
should be viewed as a political move: the choice to portray Fuller according to
society’s expectations and the decision to present her to posterity as a married
woman were conscious ways of conforming (her) to gender norms. What’s more,
their silencing of Fuller’s radicalism went way beyond settling the question of her

28



illegitimate progeniture. Just as the title of the posthumous biography reflects their
editorial stance, the fact that Fuller’s magnus opus Woman in the Nineteenth
Century is given only one subsection throughout the entire biography is enough to
suggest their elliptic, conformist approach. Fuller’s ground-breaking Dial article “The
Great Lawsuit: Man Versus Men. Woman Versus Women” is never mentioned. It is
as though the authors of Memoirs had tried to erase her radicalism from the
geography of Memoirs; and although each of the biography’s chapter titles describes
in one way or another her movements through New England and Europe, they never
really integrated in their map the various stages of her feminist journey. As Carol
Strauss-Sotiropoulos remarks, the “(male) Transcendentalist friends who compiled
Fuller’s Memoirs . . . elided her revolutionary engagement and ideology to create a
narrative of womanly yearning for love and domesticity” (“Speaking Truth” 47). In
fact, the authors of Memoirs struggled to combine their admiration for Fuller with the
threat she posed to nineteenth-century masculinity. Although they were exceptional
trailblazers in philosophical, religious, and social matters, one should try and avoid
falling into what John Matteson has described as the “lazy but seductive habit of
supposing that the heroes of American Transcendentalism were simply a crowd of
twenty-first century liberals” (33). As readers, we wish Emerson had added
something to Memoirs, that he would have mentioned Fuller’s strength and her
powerful rejection of gender constrictions. However, when asked if he could add any
additional material, Emerson replied to Channing “I hate to hear of swelling the book,
and I think not [Giuseppe] Mazzini himself, not [Christopher Pearse] Cranch, not
Browning hardly, would induce me to add a line of Appendix. Amputate, amputate.
And why a preface? If eight pages are there, let them be gloriously blank: No, no
preface. . . . I do not mean to write a needless syllable” (EL 4:294). Emerson’s

29



refusal to write a preface or appendix is not surprising for an editor trying to manage
the length of his work, but the exasperated tone of his remarks (“Amputate,
amputate”), the mention of eight “blank” pages, and of “needless syllable[s]” suggest
a degree of frustration that contrasts with his habitually “cool” temperament.
It is hard to know whether the conformism with which Emerson and his coauthors wrote Fuller’s biography was the product of a strategy to protect her or
whether they themselves were unable to accept Fuller’s radicalism to the point that
they couldn’t even write about it. In her foundational work Feminist Conversations,
Zwarg pinpoints how in Emerson’s “first journal, his surprise and horror over [Fuller’s]
death is compounded by his surprise and horror over the way some people were
using the occasion to give vent to the anxieties they harboured against her
exceptional life” (240). Here is the passage as it appears in his AZ Journal—
The timorous said, What shall we do? how shall she be received. now that she
brings a husband & a child home? But she had only to open her mouth, & a
triumphant success awaited her. She would fast enough have disposed of the
circumstances & the bystanders. For she had the impulse, & they wanted it.
Here were already mothers waiting tediously for her coming, for the education
of their daughters. Mrs Ripley thinks that the marriage with Ossoli was like that
of De Stael in her widowhood with the young De Rocca, who was enamoured
of her. and Mrs Barlow has un unshaken trust that what Margaret did, she could
well defend. (EJ 11:256)
As Zwarg points out, the endless insults targeting Fuller in the years following her
death show the magnitude of gender-based anxieties that were brought to life by the
popularity of her life and work. However, I would juxtapose Emerson’s comment in

30



his journal to a curiously equivalent statement he made in a letter to Thomas Carlyle,
written on 5 August 1850—
You will have heard our sad news of Margaret Fuller Marchesa Ossoli. . . . I
doubt you never saw in her what was inestimable here. But she died in happy
hour for herself. Her health was much exhausted. Her marriage would have
taken her away from us all, & there was a subsistence yet to be secured, &
diminished powers, & old age. (EL 4:224)
Was Emerson one of those “timorous” individuals he spoke about in his journal? This
letter to Carlyle certainly denotes a tension, an inner conflict, about Emerson’s mind
in the months following Fuller’s death that is hard to resolve. Was it to adapt to his
audience that Emerson behaved like the “timorous” he mentioned, calling Fuller’s
death fortuitous? Or did he himself believe these things? After all, Emerson knew
how Carlyle felt about Fuller; he had noted that same year that “Carlyle . . . does not
wish to see any body whom he cannot eat & reproduce in his pamphlet or pillory.
[Alcott] was meat that he could not eat, & [Margaret Fuller], likewise, so he rejected
them at once” (EJ 11:264). The words Emerson used in his letter (his concerns
about Fuller’s “exhausted health,” her finances “yet to be secured” and her “old age”)
similarly recall another passage in his journal:
Mrs Barlow has the superiority to say [of Margaret] that the death seems to her
a fit & good conclusion to the life. Her life was romantic and exceptional: So let
her death be; it sets the seal on her marriage avoids all questions of Society, all
of employment, poverty, & old age, and besides was undoubtedly
predetermined when the world was created. (EJ 11:259)
The numerous parallels between the way in which Emerson spoke of Fuller’s death
in his letters and in his journal are interesting and yet hard to decode: what did he

31



really think, and how much of what he wrote was adapted to his audience? The way
in which Emerson reused Mrs. Barlow’s argument that Fuller’s death was after all a
“good conclusion to the life” (EJ 11:259) possibly signifies that he was adapting to
his readers, thus corroborating Zwarg’s contention about his hidden frustration and
his desire to protect his late friend. However, his call to “amputate, amputate” takes
us in the opposite direction, suggesting that the decision to exclude parts of Fuller’s
life was more than a simple editorial necessity. Rather than making space for them,
parts of her life were willingly left out.
Interestingly, the way in which Emerson wrote about Fuller’s death, both
publicly and privately, differs in several respects from the comments he made after
the loss of another one of his closest friends—Henry David Thoreau. In 1863, a year
after Thoreau’s death, his Excursions were published, and the posthumous collection
of essays on nature was preceded by a “Biographical Sketch” written by Emerson. In
his historical introduction to the text, Joel Myerson’s approach to the “Sketch” is very
similar to my own reading of Memoirs: “The ‘terrible Thoreau’ Emerson presented,”
Myerson wrote, “was a humorless stoic, and his essay more often than not reveals,
what it stresses and by what it omits from Thoreau's life and personality, more about
its author than its subject” (17). In his thirty-page long tribute, Emerson describes
young Thoreau as a “strong, healthy youth, fresh from college” who, in his approach
to literature and to academia, was quite an “iconoclast” (Myerson, “Thoreau” 35).
Although Thoreau “graduated from Harvard College in 1837,” Emerson mentions that
he did so “without any literary distinction” (35) and explains how, rejecting traditional
social institutions (“he never married, he lived alone, he never went to church; he
never voted”), Thoreau chose instead to be “the bachelor of thought and Nature”
(Myerson, “Thoreau” 37). While establishing, on the one hand, Thoreau’s belonging

32



to the New England intellectual elite, Emerson’s sketch also simultaneously praised
the autonomy and confidence with which he rejected a certain number of social
conventions. About Thoreau’s death, Emerson wrote,
The country knows not yet, or in the least part, how great a son it has lost. It
seems an injury that he should leave in the midst of this broken task, which
none else can finish, -- a kind of indignity to so noble a soul, that it should
depart out of Nature before yet he has been really shown to his peers for what
he is. . . . His soul was made for the noblest society; he had in a short life
exhausted the capabilities of this world; wherever there is knowledge, wherever
there is virtue, wherever there is beauty, he will find a home. (Myerson,
“Thoreau” 54-55)
The tone of this eulogy is not in complete contrast with Emerson’s mourning remarks
after Fuller died—in his journal, he wrote “To the last her country poses inhospitable
to her; brave, eloquent, subtle, accomplished, devoted, constant soul! If nature
availed in America to give birth to many such as she, freedom & honour & letters &
art too were safe in this new world” (EJ 11:256). And yet Emerson never mentioned
Fuller’s “broken task”—i.e. the great things she could have achieved for the women
of her country if her life had not been cut so short. More generally, Emerson’s
forgiving, benevolent tone throughout the “Sketch” is strikingly different to his
account of Fuller’s life in Memoirs. Fuller is never really praised for her “dissent from
the commonplaces of popular acceptation” (MMFO 1:96): although Emerson shows
a great awareness as to the dangers of defying social expectations, he does not
praise her courage for challenging those norms, “She had a dangerous reputation for
satire, in addition to her great scholarship. The men thought she carried too many
guns, and the women did not like one who despised them” (MMFO 1:202). On the

33



contrary, Thoreau’s nonconformity with regards to the traditional paths that young,
white, male Americans were expected to take is depicted as an act of strength and
intelligence—“No college ever offered him a diploma, or a professor’s chair; no
academy made him its corresponding secretary, its discoverer, or even its member.
Whether these learned bodies feared the satire of his presence” (Myerson,
“Thoreau” 47). The word choice and tone of Emerson’s commentary on his two
friends reflect the gender limitations of the society in which Fuller and Thoreau
evolved. About Thoreau, he celebrated the fact that “[h]ad his genius been only
contemplative, he had been fitted to his life, but with his energy and practical ability
he seemed born for great enterprise and for command” (Myerson, “Thoreau” 53).
In Memoirs, he deplored that Fuller “had, indeed, a rude strength, which, if it could
have been supported by an equal health, would have given her the efficiency of the
strongest men” (1:231). While Thoreau went to college, despite then taking a
different route than the one traditionally expected from him (“he favored stoic
simplicity rather than pursuing earthly pleasures”), Fuller was never given such
option purely because of her sex. Thanks to her father’s strict education, Fuller was
able to rise above some of the limiting confines of the passivity and submissiveness
expected by most from women. Being cut out from college education also informed
her philosophy, in that she put education at the heart of her feminist call for women’s
rights.
Reputation, that is the “overall quality or character as seen or judged by
people in general” (Webster), is not univocal and can encompass elements that
are at times totally contradictory: in the year Fuller died, she was a very famous
and yet also a widely criticised literary figure. Member of the Transcendental Club,
journalist, translator, her popularity explains why her biography was such a

34



success when it was published in 1852. While some were eager to know more
about her life, Woman in the Nineteenth Century and “The Great Lawsuit” had
attracted a range of negative criticism. The ones opposed to women’s rights thought
it was scandalous, others like Orestes Brownson “believe[d] Miss Fuller wholly in the
wrong” (257) on the basis of religion, and others—amongst whom were some of
Fuller’s acquaintances—criticised her for behaving too much like a bourgeoise (see,
for instance, Harriet Martineau’s comments). Defined as “ultra-radical” in some
newspapers, the visionary and courageous nature of Fuller’s writings on women is
often the reason why she is studied today. And yet her radicalism was definitely one
of the most problematic aspects of her life in the eyes of her contemporaries—a topic
that the biographers of Memoirs all found troublesome to tackle.
If Fuller’s radicalism was a challenge to her biographers, it is still something
of a problem today. In 2022, Fuller is sometimes depicted as a twenty-first-century
woman whom, despite her avant-gardism, she simply wasn’t. Reiterating
“Chevigny’s 1976 demand that ‘we reverse the usual practice of seeing Margaret
Fuller as a fascinating exception to the condition of American women of her time’”
(159), Mary Loeffelholz notes that the “anxiety of exceptionalism still lingers around
the figure of Margaret Fuller in feminist literary scholarship, coupled with a deep
anxiety over critical anachronism and identification” (160). She explains that the
“problem with Margaret Fuller in the writing of feminist literary history is both that we
fear she is too unlike other (middle-class, white, New England) literary women of her
period and that she is too like ‘us,’ if us means late-twentieth-century feminist literary
intellectuals, mostly similar to Fuller in respect to race and class, who probably can't
help sharing Fuller’s will to believe that intellectual labor coincides with personal selfrealization” (160). If Loeffelholz wrote this in 2000, the fact that Matteson made a

35



similar call in 2013 (in Margaret Fuller and Her Circles) suggests that a tendency to
assimilation is still a reality. In “Fuller and the Problem of Feminine Virtue,” Matteson
qualifies Fuller’s liberality by showing that although she was a radical with regards to
women’s rights, there were still what we would now term conservative elements in
her. Another warning must be added about race: as pointed out by Phyllis Cole in a
lecture on “Margaret Fuller and the American Women’s Movement” in September
2020, “on the ideological level, Fuller was surely anti-slavery (she condemned the
Mexican war and the institution of slavery), but she wasn’t as much an advocate for
African-American slaves as she was for women.” Avallone also points out that while
Romanticism contributed much to Woman in the Nineteenth Century, it also
involved Fuller in some of its problematics. Romantic idealizing left her prey to
racialism, as in her equating “Women of her country [...] – Exaltadas”
exclusively with “Women of English [...] nobleness” (1845, 152), in maintaining
that the French are liars, and in including an appendix that celebrates as
religious virtue a Christian woman’s murderous refusal to marry a Moslem. If
Fuller was able to tap the emancipatory power of Romantic discourse of
nationalism, her yoking of an idealized America with her (proto)feminist project
also involves her book in the national imperial project of westward expansion,
despite her protest against annexation. (348)
Avallone also adds that these “limitations notwithstanding, Woman in the Nineteenth
Century has brought and continues to bring Romanticism to inspire diverse
emancipatory projects, most notably the ongoing movement for women’s equality”
(348). As societies think of ways to discuss the work of their authors, Christina
Katopodis (Fuller Society Board member) explains,

36



These authors were not perfect. They had bodies that smelled, opinions that
changed, some ideas worth keeping and others worth critically revaluating and
problematizing. If we’re willing to treat them as complex and changing, they can
help us to reflect on our common struggles, fight for equality, and resistance to
injustice today.
In “Margaret Fuller and Antislavery: A Cause Identical,” Albert Von Frank’s stresses
the changing nature of Fuller’s political thinking: her move to Italy, her radicalization
due to finding herself in the midst of the combat, changed her views of abolitionism
too. “Conditions as she found them in Rome,” von Frank explains, “put her in touch
not with the period of Brutus and Caesar, but with history as social struggle, as an
effort by a disfranchised class to effect justice by improving the conditions of its own
existence (“Identical” 145). Unfortunately, a lot of that thought got lost when Fuller
died. But her Tribune articles testify to her changing political involvement not only
with regards to the Italian Revolution but also with regards to American democracy.
There is little doubt, after taking all these dimensions into account, about the
complexities that were involved in writing a life of Fuller in the 1850s. Her reputation,
already fragile because she was a woman, was at stake and Emerson knew that as
he began to work on the biography. Whether his censure stemmed from a desire to
protect her or from a refusal to accept her passions and beliefs, Emerson’s account
of Fuller does not do justice to the kind of intellectual we know she was. And yet,
although generally considered “bowdlerized and unreliable” (Smith 23), Memoirs
deserves to be examined more closely than it has until now, for the information it
provides about Emerson as a thinker, about his relationship with Fuller and about his
relationship with women’s rights, is important.

37



The first chapter of my thesis is entitled “Emerson and Fuller in Conversation:
On Friendship, Womanhood, and Poetry.” An analysis of Fuller’s friendship with
Emerson will not only provide the opportunity to reflect on the philosophical meaning
they respectively attached to friendship, or the intellectual divergences that animated
the two Transcendentalists’ discussions, but it will also allow us to consider how the
notion of gender—its meaning, its realities, and its limits—affected their friendship
and most importantly impacted how Emerson viewed and wrote about Fuller in
Memoirs of Margaret Fuller Ossoli. In the first chapter, I rely on the notion of
“conversation” as the narrative thread of my analysis, as I interrogate Fuller’s and
Emerson’s respective visions of womanhood by looking at Emerson’s depiction of
Fuller in Memoirs and by comparing it with Fuller’s take on the subject.
The first section of this chapter, “Emerson on Fuller: Memoirs, Idealism, and
Women’s Rights,” examines how the two thinkers thought and wrote about
womanhood. The fact that gender should be a recurring topic of conversation
between the two is evident—in fact, both alluded in their journals to those
discussions—but did they agree on anything while discussing it? The following
section, “‘Woman [and] Artist’: Margaret Fuller on Bettine Brentano-von Arnim and
Friendship,” also provides an original outlook on Transcendentalist friendships by
focusing on Fuller’s lesser-known “Bettine Brentano and her Friend Günderode” Dial
article (1842). Framing her translation of Karoline von Günderode and Brentano-von
Arnim’s correspondence with a commentary on human relationships, Fuller idealises
the famous friendship which she insists on characterizing as ideal precisely because
it is all female. How can we compare Fuller’s understanding of friendship with
Emerson’s famous (and more or less contemporaneous) homonymous essay? The
third section of the chapter is entitled “Transcendentalists in Conversation: Margaret

38



Fuller, Sophia Ripley, and ‘Woman,’” and it expands this examination of
Transcendentalist views on womanhood by focusing on another underexplored Dial
article‚ Sophia Ripley’s “Woman” (1841). After considering ideal womanhood in the
first and second sections, I turn to Ripley’s call for “real” womanhood.

39



1.1 Emerson on Fuller: Memoirs, Idealism, and Women’s Rights

In a letter to William Furness written in January 1852, Emerson’s reply to the latter’s
invitation to speak at an event was “I hate to come, but I will come, if you say I must”
(Fruitlands). Emerson explained his strange retort stating that it was “[s]imply
because of the foolish weakness one has, when that word liberty is named. Since it
is everywhere resisted and blasphemed, there seems a sort of imperativeness to
stand for it, however badly” (Fruitlands). At end of the same letter, he noted “I shall
have to copy & reedify the poor statement I got up for my townsmen some time last
spring [most likely referring to his “Fugitive Slave Law Address”] – and which, like all
my sallies into politics, I hate to think of” (Fruitlands). Almost ten years after arguing
in favor of private rather than public improvement in “New England Reformers,”
Emerson was clearly still unable to fully reconcile himself with the idea of engaging
with the world of politics. One year after California was admitted to the Union as a
free state in 1850, and a new fugitive slave law was passed as part of that
compromise, Emerson declared that “the last year has forced us all into politics, and
made it a paramount duty to seek what it is often a duty to shun” (Political 135). I
argue that another event that took place in 1850, namely Fuller’s death, forced
Emerson into action. In fact, I believe that working on Memoirs put him into the
(somewhat unwanted) position of having to formulate a public response on the
question of women’s rights.
Emerson’s ambivalence towards public activism manifested itself both in his
interventions on slavery and on the woman question. After his 1844 “Address on the
Emancipation of the British West Indies,” in which he recognised for the first time the
pragmatic good of organized action, Emerson wrote to Carlyle that “though I
40



sometimes accept a popular call, & preach on Temperance or the Abolition of
slavery, as lately on the First of August, I am sure to feel before I have done with it,
what an intrusion it is into another sphere & so much loss of virtue in my own” (qtd. in
Gougeon, Virtue’s Hero 92). This reluctance also caused disappointment among his
audience. Oliver Wendell Holmes noted in his biography that Emerson’s 1844
address “was appropriate but also lacking”: he described how “This discourse would
not have satisfied the Abolitionists. It was too general in its propositions, full of
humane and generous sentiments, but not looking to their extreme and immediate
method of action’” (181). Similarly, Caroline Healey Dall wrote directly to Emerson
after his 1855 lecture on “Woman” noting that “some of the papers thought it doubtful
whether you were for us or against us” (qtd. in Eckel, “Gender” 193). In The Poetics
of Transition, Jonathan Levin explains that if “Emerson [was] so dismissive of
organization, even organization in the name of what is ostensibly good” it is because
his “pragmatic idealism aim[ed] to cultivate the sacred without limiting it to any of its
particular representations” (18-19). However, Emerson did eventually come round
and addressed social issues. Indeed, Levin calls him “a champion of social reform”
(20), indicating that his “first major address on slavery came . . . as early as 1837, in
a Concord address on ‘Slavery’” (20). “This talk,” Levin adds, “is largely unknown
because it was never published and the manuscript has not survived, but the notes
for the talk do appear in Emerson's journal” (20).
Whether we locate the beginning of Emerson’s abolitionism in 1837 or in
1844, it is a matter of fact that it took him much longer to publicly express his support
for women’s rights than to speak up against slavery. In fact, whereas he reacted to
the Fugitive Slave Law in a letter published in the Liberator on 18 April 1851, which
was followed the next month by the address mentioned above, Emerson rejected an

41



invitation that same year to attend a convention for women’s rights in Worcester,
Massachusetts. In fact, he excused himself by noting that he was working on a
biography of Margaret Fuller: in the letter, which was printed in the New-York Daily
Tribune, Emerson indicated that he “shall not have any opportunity to come to [the
convention], for [he was] tied fast at home by a task” and added that he was “by no
means sure that [he] should find any message worth bringing” (7). He concluded that
he hoped his absence would be forgiven in light of the fact that this “task” was “the
inditing the ‘Life of Margaret Fuller.’” The letter was “introduced by the statement that
in the preceding year Emerson [had] signed the call for the convention” (EL 4:261). It
was not until 1855 that Emerson gave his first public address on “Woman”; I view
Memoirs as his actual first public response on the matter, a response which I think
reflects the differences, and acts as the site of confrontation between, Emerson’s
idealistic vision of womanhood and Fuller’s feminism.
In Feminist Conversations, Zwarg aims to uncover the mutual influence the
two thinkers had on each other with regards to their understanding of womanhood,
as she asserts that Emerson’s “conversations with Fuller are the clue to
understanding the various attributes of that engagement” (4). Focusing on Memoirs,
Zwarg argues that “Fuller’s oddly represented life” was “the product of Emerson’s
hostility toward – and embarrassment over – the frigid account he feels compelled to
provide” (240). For Zwarg, the way in which Emerson memorialised Fuller by
minimizing her radical ideas and behaviours was all part of a strategy by which he
“consistently attempts. . . to put discord between Fuller and himself” because his
“audience was curious, indeed, too curious, about the nature of their ‘intercourse, as
such’” (Feminist 247). Although I agree that Emerson’s strategy to defuse the radical
nature of Fuller’s life was intended to protect her posthumous reputation, I argue that

42



Emerson’s idealism in his portrayal of Fuller reveals the limits of his support for
women’s rights. In the letter to Furness quoted above, Emerson describes how he
“just escaped from a task that has absorbed near six months, a labor of love but of
very questionable judgment, –Margaret Fuller Memoirs, – a great deal of labor
bestowed to very small effect, I fear” (Fruitlands). Based on this quotation, I view
Emerson’s strategy to “idealise” Fuller in Memoirs, and women more generally, as a
sign of his “failure” to fully support women’s rights. In fact, I believe that his hesitation
and anxiety over Transcendentalism and political involvement crystallize in his
portrait of Fuller in Memoirs, showing that his engagement with the movement was
tentative, gradualist, and often unsupportive.

I – Transcendentalism, Idealism, and Women’s Rights
A) Of Private and Public Conversations: Of Consciousness and Appearances
In “The Transcendentalist”, a lecture from January 1842, Emerson explained that
“[w]hat is popularly called Transcendentalism among us, is Idealism” (CW 1:201). He
then noted that if “the materialist takes his departure from the external world, and
esteems a man as one product of that. The idealist takes his departure from his
consciousness, and reckons the world an appearance” (CW 1:203). Instead of
turning to the material world for answers, Transcendentalists looked inwards and
focused on “individual consciousness”: as Emerson argued in “The American
Scholar” in 1837, "[t]he deeper [the scholar] dives into his privatest, secretest
presentiment, to his wonder he finds, this is the most acceptable, most public, and
universally true" (CW 1:63). Not only did they achieve a revolution of the spirit,
asserting that there is “a spiritual divinity within each of that is separate and different

43



from the formalized religion of the Church” (Cramer 55), but Transcendentalists also
provided an original outlook on social progress by locating its source within the Self.
Between 1836 (when they first met at Emerson’s home in Concord,
Massachusetts) and 1846 (the year Fuller sailed to Europe where she would spend
the last four years of her life), Fuller and Emerson often exchanged views on social
reform as they interrogated the meaning of concepts like “woman” and “marriage.”
An entry in Fuller’s 1842 journal reveals the frequency of those discussions—“We
got to talking, as we almost always do, on Man and Woman, and Marriage” (WNC
184). Both in favor of women’s rights, Fuller and Emerson were convinced, as
Emerson wrote in his journal in 1851, “that, as long as [women] have not equal rights
of property & right of voting, they are not on a right footing.” He explained,
this wrong grew out of the savage & military period, when, because a woman
could not defend herself, it was necessary that she should be assigned to some
man who was paid for guarding her. Now in more tranquil & decorous times it is
plain she should have her property, &, when she marries, the parties should as
regards property, go into a partnership full or limited, but explicit & recorded.
(Political 155)
Emerson’s defence of a woman’s right to property, which he saw as a symbol of her
independence, was based on the fact that times had changed and that it was
retrograde to subjugate her to man. Beyond the pragmatic (and yet fundamental)
aspects of a woman’s life, Fuller’s notes show that she and Emerson also debated
the philosophical nature of “marriage,” as she recounts in an 1842 journal entry—
W. took his usual ground. Love is only phenomenal, a contrivance of nature, in
her circular motion. . . . The soul knows nothing of marriage, in the sense of a
permanent union between two personal existences. The soul is married to each

44



new thought as it enters into it. If this thought puts on the form of man or
woman [,] if it last you seventy years, what then? There is but one love, that for
the Soul of all Souls, let it put on what cunning disguises it will, still at last you
find yourself lonely, -- the Soul. (WNC 184)
Although journals and letters are the only existing records relating those
discussions, there are correlations between these conversations and Fuller’s and
Emerson’s respective public statements on the matter. In 1844, Fuller wrote in her
journal that
the distinction of sex lies not in opposition but in distribution and proportion of
attributes. Whether this dualism will always continue I know not but at present
we cannot conceive of active happiness without it. To find oneself in another
nature, likeness and unlikeness. Sun acting on the earth are conjugal, - sun
and moon fraternal. (MHarF 37)
Just a year later, she stated in Woman in the Nineteenth Century that “[t]here is no
wholly masculine man, no purely feminine woman” (WNC 69). In Marshall’s
biography, she remarks that
Perhaps Margaret herself was not aware of how bold her statement was. Had
she been present at the first meeting of the Transcendental Club three years
before, when Waldo Emerson complained to the six males present that even
the best thinkers of the day were hobbled by a ‘feminine or receptive’ frame of
mind rather than a ‘masculine or creative’ one, what might she have said? But
of course she had not been invited. (139)
If we look at Emerson’s public statements on women’s rights—in “Manners”
from Essays: Second Series, in his 1855 address “Woman” or in his 1869 lecture—it
is clear that he agreed with Fuller that “woman” and “man” were not discrete

45



categories as opposed to what the proponents of the concept of “separate spheres”
wanted people to believe in nineteenth-century America. In 1869, Emerson asserted,
“We look upon the man as the representative of intellect and the woman as the
representative of affection; but each shares the characteristics of the other, only in
the man one predominates and in the woman the other” (Gougeon, “Woman” 588)4.
There is a definite resemblance here between Fuller’s and Emerson’s words: by
focusing on the soul, they moved beyond the gendered roles of “wife” and “husband”
as they looked, instead, at “man” and “woman” as fluid concepts which share a set of
common characteristics, although in different proportions.
In a letter to Fuller written in July 1839, Emerson noted that women “always
add religion to talent, and so give our hope an infinite play until society gets
possession of them and carries them captive to Babylon. If they would only hold
themselves at their own price, if they would not subdue their sentiments, the age of
heroes would come at once!” (EL 2:210-211). Focusing on internal change (he asked
women to “hold themselves at their own price”), Emerson wished that that would
engender social change for women (“if they would not subdue their sentiments, the
age of heroes would come at once”). Emerson’s quote is a good illustration of what
David M. Robinson has written on the matter, that “Idealism was not, for the
transcendentalists, a philosophy of detachment or escapism” (“New York” 279).
Transcendentalists indeed “connected idealism with the concept of hope and felt that
the capacity to recognise the injustice of present social arrangements signified that
the present was not fixed or permanent” (Robinson, “New York” 279).

I rely on Len Gougeon’s transcription. The lecture was originally printed in Bow
Bells magazine, “Woman.” Bow Bells: A Magazine of General Literature and Art for
Family Reading, vol. 11, no. 265, 1869, p. 118. Also, see Chapter Three for a more
in-depth discussion of Emerson’s public support of the women’s rights movement.
4

46



B) From the Personal to the Collective
Urging “woman [to] think of herself as soul still more than as woman” (MHarF 37-38),
Fuller thought of gender as a pivotal element of the transformation of the self. She
addressed the struggles of being a woman in the 1840s during her Boston
Conversations, during which she recounted how “she constantly heard people talk as
if men were only animals & women were only plants- That men were made to get a
living-to eat & drink – and women to be ornaments of society-as if these were the
ultimate aims of being” (Simmons 217). At a later time, Fuller similarly ridiculed these
kinds of views asking “And yet where lies this difference betwixt male and female? I
cannot trace it more than in the plant world farther than function” (WNC 202). She
used her own example to show that “How all but infinite the mystery by which sex is
stamped in this germ? . . . here am I the child of masculine energy & Eugene [her
brother] of feminine loveliness” (WNC 202).
Many of the Conversations were centred on Greek mythology, a choice that
Fuller explained during the second conversation held in November 1839: “It is quite
separated from all exciting local subjects- It is serious without being solemn, without
excluding every mode of intellectual action it is playful as well as deep. It is general
subject for it is a complete expression of the cultivation of a nation- It objective &
tangible” (Simmons 204). In her notes of the March 1841 series which also included
a male audience, Dall recorded that “To understand this Mythology, we must
denationalize ourselves” (Margaret 28). Relying on ideas to defamiliarize her readers
from typical gender normative frameworks was a technique that Fuller would adopt
throughout her career: in one of her most famous Dial essays entitled “Leila” (1841),
she described a very dematerialized Leila, who was “a spirit under a mask, which
she might throw off at any instant . . . [f]or she ever transcends sex, age, state and

47



all the barriers behind which man entrenches himself from the assaults of Spirit”
(WNC 169).
In her exploration of woman’s powers, Fuller relied on the world of ideas to
think about woman unimpeded by form. As Steele suggests, “Representing idealized
images of female power, such figures allowed her to remap her society’s vision of
female potential” (“Political Sympathy” 125). She meant to counter the common
assertion that woman was less than man; for Fuller, not only was woman equal to
man, but women and men actually shared a set of common characteristics (“Man
partakes of the feminine in the Apollo, woman of the Masculine as Minerva”
[“Lawsuit” 419]). As she would write in Woman, “Male and female represent the two
sides of the great radical dualism” (68). Fuller admired the Greeks because, at least
at a theoretic level, they considered the feminine and the masculine as equals: she
reflected in Woman
We are told of the Greek nations in general, that woman occupied there an
infinitely lower place than man. It is difficult to believe this when we see . . .
such ideals as Cassandra, Iphigenia, Macaria, where Sybilline priestesses told
the oracle of the highest god, and he could not be content to reign with a court
of fewer than nine muses. Even victory wore a female form. (WNC 31)
She continued coincidingly “But whatever were the facts of daily life, I cannot
complain of the age and nation . . . Male and female heads are distinct in expression,
but equal in beauty, strength and calmness” (WNC 31).
As is apparent from the transcripts of some of the Conversations (Simmons;
Dall), Fuller employed embodied ideals and in particular ancient Greek gods and
goddesses in order to inspire women to rethink the oppressive norms that
characterised antebellum America. Neptune, Diana, Apollo, “[a]ll were the

48



embodiments of Absolute Ideas, of ideas that had no origin, -that were eternal” (Dall,
Margaret 27). Using Minerva as a symbol for woman’s strength, Fuller relied on
idealism to advance her feminist ambition. Steele notes the connection between
Fuller’s feminist use of idealism and self-reliance: “Fuller’s image of Minerva
represented female spiritual independence as the foundation of self-reliance. In a
sense, she claimed for herself and her American sisters an independence of spirit . .
. as profound as that asserted by Emerson” (“Political Sympathy” 128). Centring her
discussions on Greek goddesses had important practical implications for it indeed
allowed Fuller to liberate her students from the constraining limitations that society
imposed on woman’s quotidian existence: by claiming “for herself and her American
sisters an independence of spirit,” she allowed them to be “women thinking.”
Fuller also aligned herself with Emerson in the way she modelled her
Conversations—Russell Goodman notes that by “requir[ing] that her students not
simply listen to her, but that each woman be ‘willing to communicate what was in her
mind’. . . she was in accord with Emerson’s idea that everyone has something
original to say and do, and with his conception of the scholar as an ‘active soul’”
(165-166). However, Fuller’s method also contrasted Emerson’s. During the only
series of the Boston Conversations that was also opened to men, held in March
1841, Elizabeth Peabody observed that
Mr. E. only served to display her powers. With his sturdy reiteration of his
uncompromising idealism, his absolute denial of the fact of human nature, he
gave her opportunity and excitement to unfold and illustrate her realism and
acceptance of conditions. …. She proceeds in her search after the unity of
things, the divine harmony, not by exclusion, as Mr. E. does, but by

49



comprehension, -, and so, no poorest, saddest spirit, but she will lead to hope
and faith. (Chevigny 228)
In her record of the 1841 Conversation series, Dall similarly reported how Peabody
“got into a little maze trying to introduce Margaret and R.W.E. to each other, – a
consummation which, however devoutly to be wished, will never happen!” (Margaret
118-119). The incompatibility of their two characters is inexorably doomed to last,
Dall remarked. The two friends, Dall’s quote suggests, were simply too different to be
compatible. At the conclusion of the Conversations, in a letter from July 1844, Fuller
explained such difference to Emerson himself, to whom she wrote “You are intellect,
I am life” (FL 3:209). This strong statement that opposes a somewhat purely
theoretical, abstract and/or idealistic view to a more embodied one might be
explained by another similar remark Fuller made this time in her private journals two
days earlier (July 11th): “He read me his essay on Life. How beautiful, and full and
grand. But oh, how cold. Nothing but Truth in the Universe, no love and no various
realities” (WNC 197). Two years earlier, Fuller similarly noted with a disappointed,
somewhat melancholic tone, “we had an excellent talk: We agreed that my god was
love, his truth. W. said that these statements alternate of course, in every mind, the
only difference was in which you were most at home, that he liked the pure
mathematics of the thing” (WNC 182). Of course, as critics have described, it is this
discrepancy that caused Fuller and Emerson’s friendship crisis in 1840–1841:
Fuller’s letters to Emerson from that period show her intense desire to be emotionally
closer to him, but they also relate her frustration at his inability to understand her
requests. Hanlon, in “Knowing by Heart,” describes how “Emerson’s friendship with
Fuller represented an intersection of experiential planes definable not simply in terms
of intellectual exchange or ‘influence’ but also of affective disjuncture” (53). Fuller

50



eventually resigned herself to the fact that between her and Emerson there “was an
interchange of facts but no conversation, yet it was pleasant to be with him again”
(WNC 181), “my expectations are moderate now: it is his beautiful presence I prize,
far more than our intercourse” (WNC 182).
For Fuller, idealism was not a rejection of life just as Transcendentalism was
not a rejection of the collective. Acknowledging what Steele has since called
Emerson’s “platonized poetics,” Fuller wrote about her friend in a journal entry in
August 1844, “He is hard to know, the subtle Greek!” (WNC 201).

II – “He is Hard to Know, the Subtle Greek!”
A) Emerson’s Idealism and “Woman”
I argue that Emerson’s views on women’s rights were characterised by an opposition
between the ideal and the material world. First, that tension manifested itself in
Emerson’s writing as a resistance towards organized action. Although like other
major Transcendentalists he supported the idea that women should be able to vote
and to own property, Emerson was initially disapproving of the movement. In a
journal entry in 1851, written while he was working on Memoirs, he remarked “I do
not think a woman’s convention, called in the spirit of this at Worcester, can much
avail. It is an attempt to manufacture public opinion, & of course repels all persons
who love the simple & direct method. I find the Evils real & great” (Political 155).
According to Goodman, Emerson stepped out of his comfort zone when writing his
“polemical addresses,” and his style changed as a consequence of that: Goodman
indeed remarks that these “do not have the shape or living thought of the
Emersonian essay, and they were more effective for this absence. Although they are
congruent with Emerson’s philosophy at certain points—on freedom, self-reliance,

51



and morality, they are quite different from the rest of Emerson’s writing” (198). The
tension between ideal and material also appears in Emerson’s reflections on
womanhood. In the same journal entry quoted above from 1851, Emerson remarked
how
as soon as you have a sound & beautiful woman, a figure in the style of the
Antique Juno, Diana, Pallas, Venus, & the Graces, all falls into place, the men
are magnetized, heaven opens, & no lawyer need be called in to prepare a
clause, for woman moulds the lawgiver. I should therefore advise that the
Woman’s Convention should be holden in the Sculpture Gallery, that this high
remedy might be suggested. (Political 155)
Here, the strong emphasis on aesthetics (“beautiful”, “Venus, & the Graces,”
“magnetised”) juxtaposes the perfect proportions of sculpture to the imperfect
appearance of the real world. Emerson elevates goddesses and the artists able to
pay tribute to them through art, but he also reduces “womanhood” to how women
appear in the eyes of “the men.” The suggestion, however ironic or unrealistic, of
holding a “Woman’s Convention” in a “Sculpture Gallery” signals the degree to which
Emerson misunderstood the spirit of the women’s rights movement as it first started
in the 1850s. On the one hand, Emerson admired the “ideal” woman’s religious and
moral power: as he declared in his lecture from 1869, “We know woman as
affectionate, as religious, as oracular, as delighting . . . .In all ages woman has been
the representative of religion” (qtd. in Gougeon 588). Here, the “power” of woman is
seen as a power “over” man: in 1869, Emerson similarly wrote that “She holds a man
to religion. There is no man reprobate, so careless of religious duty, but what
delights to have his wife a saint. All men feel the advantages that abound of that
quality a woman” (qtd. in Gougeon 588). During the only series of the Boston

52



Conversations that also involved a male audience, one of Fuller’s remarks (reported
by Dall in Margaret and Her Friends) reads as an ironic reply to the tendency to
emphasise beauty and softness in woman, even within Transcendentalist circles:
“Margaret said the Olympian Deities were like modern men, who talk to women
forever about their softness and delicacy, until women imagine that the only good
thing in man is a strong arm” (101).
At the same time, however, Emerson held very different opinions on “real”
women. Quoting Plato, he stated: “‘Women,’ Plato says, ‘are the same as men in
faculty, only less.” I find them all victims of their temperament” (Political 155).5
Furthering this generalisation, he explained, “this excess of temperament remains
not less in Marriage. Few women are sane. They emit a coloured atmosphere, one
would say, floods upon floods of coloured light, in which they walk evermore, & see
all objects through this warm tinted mist which envelopes them. Men are not, to the
same degree, temperamented” (Political 156). This shows how Emerson’s belief in a
certain fluidity between men and women did not stop him from utilising negative
gendered stereotypes about women to differentiate between the two sexes.
Described through the “colored atmosphere they emit,” his descriptions of women
show them as dematerialized, and the passivity of their status ironically places them
far from any sense of political agency.
Emerson’s remarks on woman in his lecture “Manners” from Essays: Second
Series (1844) show that he did not see how this type of idealisation could harm
women, but rather he saw it as an argument in support of women’s rights,

5 In Woman, Fuller also commented on Plato’s misogyny:

“Plato, the man of
intellect, treats woman in the Republic as property” (60).
53



Certainly let her be as much better placed in the laws and in social forms as the
most zealous reformer can ask, but I confide so entirely in her inspiring and
musical nature, that I believe only [woman] herself can show us how she shall
be served. The wonderful generosity of her sentiments raises her at times into
heroical and godlike regions, and verifies the pictures of Minerva, Juno, or
Polymnia; and by the firmness with which she treads her upward path, she
convinces the coarsest calculators that another road exists than that which their
feet know. (145-146)
Here as well, Emerson’s support for women’s rights rests on a contradictory
approach to women by which he, on the one hand, defends their autonomy in
claiming new rights (“I believe only [woman] herself can show us how she shall be
served”) and, on the other hand, he proposes again a view of woman as sentimental,
in spite of herself (“her inspiring and musical nature,” “wonderful generosity of her
sentiments raises her at times into heroical and godlike regions”) which celebrates
the same qualities used to discriminate against women.
B) “O queen of the American Parnassus”: Emerson on Fuller in Memoirs
Although he was often critical of her personality, Emerson’s chapters in
Memoirs are filled with complimentary remarks about Fuller’s talents. The manner in
which he does so deserves to be analysed, for the vision of womanhood that
transpires from it says a lot about his thoughts on the subject in 1852. Loyal to the
word’s etymology, Emerson calls Fuller not woman but uses the word “queen”
instead,
Her arrival was a holiday, and so was her abode. She stayed a few days, often
a week, more seldom a month, and all tasks that could be suspended were put
aside to catch the favorable hour, in walking, riding or boating, to talk with this

54



joyful guest, who brought wit, anecdotes, love-stories, tragedies oracles with
her, and, with her broad web of relations to so many fine friends, seemed like
the queen of some parliament of love. (MMFO 1:213)
Here the term “queen” is used to suggest a certain moral elevation. In particular, the
phrase “her arrival was a holiday” implies that there was a somewhat saintly element
in Fuller’s presence. In a letter written in 1840, Emerson similarly described Fuller’s
elevating nature by insisting on the contrast between frivolity and morality: “I thought
you a great court lady with a Louis Quatorze taste for diamonds & splendor, and I
find you with a ‘Bible in your hand,’ faithful to the new Ideas, beholding undaunted
their tendency” (EL 2:337). Fuller’s reply to that letter shows that she did not
completely agree with her friend’s depiction: “To L. [Lidian Emerson] my love. In her,
I have always recognized the saintly element. That, better than a bible in my hand,
shows that it cannot be to me wholly alien. Yet am I no saint, no anything, but a great
soul born to know all, before it can return to the creative fount” (FL 2:160). Fuller
rejected Emerson’s praise by insisting that “I am no saint, no anything”: she showed
that she not believe in such disembodied characterisations, mentioning instead her
thirst for knowledge and describing herself as “a great soul born to know all.”
In Memoirs, Emerson emphasised Fuller’s “love of truth”: “Margaret crowned
all her talents and virtues with a love of truth, and the power to speak it. In great and
small matters, she was a woman of her word, and gave those who conversed with her
the unspeakable comfort that flows from plain dealing” (MMFO 1:303). In connection
with that “love of truth,” however, Emerson referred again to the theme of elevation:
his sentences are filled with hints of moral and physical ascent, as in “It requires a
clear sight, and, still more, a high spirit, to deal with falsehood in the decisive way”
(MMFO 1:305). In a letter to Fuller, written in 1840, he called her “queen of the

55



American Parnassus” (EL 2:316). Interestingly, Emerson also used the noun “queen”
to describe Anna Barker, Samuel Gray Ward’s wife, as “a vision of grace & beauty –
a natural queen.” The remark about Barker suggests that Emerson understood the
noun “queen” as a connection between physical beauty and morality. The theme of
“elevation” also pervaded his later writings, such as this journal entry from March 1843
in which he declared his great admiration for Fuller, “A pure & purifying mind,
selfpurifying also, full of faith in men & inspiring it” (WNC 190), and described how
“[s]he rose before me at times into heroical & godlike regions, and I could remember
no superior women, but thought of Ceres, Minerva, Proserpine, and the august ideal
forms of the Foreworld” (WNC 190). This is clearly the journal version of his later
remarks on “Manners.” In the same entry, he wrote “Her experience contains, I know,
golden moments, which if they could be fitly narrated, would stand equally beside any
histories of magnanimity which the world contains” (WNC 191).
Less than ten years later, Emerson did narrate those “golden moments”—and
yet, his assessment of that narrative was not really positive as shown by his letter to
William Furness quoted in my introduction (in the letter, he described Memoirs as “a
labor of love but of very questionable judgment,” “a great deal of labor bestowed to
very small effect” [Fruitlands]). In his lecture “Being and Seeming”, read for the first
time in January 1838, Emerson declared that “a work of art, of whatever kind, sets us
in the same state of mind as the artist was when he made it” (EL 300). With
Memoirs, we can as readers feel the author’s desire to protect Fuller’s reputation and
the awkward work it resulted in. Besides the numerous similes of Fuller as queen,
Memoirs is also pervaded with negative comments by Emerson about Fuller’s
personality that focus on her “constitution”—a term which denotes the physical, the
material as opposed to the abstract and remote dimension of a “queen.” In

56



“Temperament,” Emerson notes “She had a strong constitution, and of course its
reactions were strong; and this is the reason why in all her life she has so much to
say of her fate.” (1:227) In a section entitled “Letters,” Emerson narrates how “I have
looked over volumes of her letters to me and others. . . . They are tainted with a
mysticism, which to me appears so much an affair of constitution, . . .. In our noble
Margaret, her personal feeling colors all her judgment of persons, of books, of
pictures, and even of the laws of the world” (MMFO 1:279). The term “constitution”
seems in these quotes to have become the instrument of a pejorative, gendered
framing of certain practices.

Elevating the eternal feminine in Margaret and distinguishing it from the real
woman was eminently Platonic. However, it also shows that in 1852, as Eckel writes
with regards to his 1855 address “Woman,” “Emerson seems more like a man tangled
in his historical context than a thinker who transcends it” (“Gender” 193). Indeed, his
celebration of woman as “queen” reads like a reaffirmation of the qualities that were
typically associated with womanhood in the early nineteenth-century (particularly the
association between external beauty and morality), without making any attempt to
revolutionize it. Emerson and women’s rights is a subject on which critical attention is
turning more and more often (in fact, such will be the title of one of the chapters in the
forthcoming The Oxford Handbook to Ralph Waldo Emerson edited by Christopher
Hanlon, due to be published in 2024), and this section has shown that Memoirs has
an essential part to play in our understanding of such a topic. What emerges from our
analysis is that the use of “idealism” as a framework to understand “womanhood” was
part of both Fuller’s and Emerson’s Transcendentalisms. That said, while he seemed

57



to have remained entangled in it in his depiction of Margaret in Memoirs, Fuller utilized
the world of ideas as means of fostering female empowerment.
Fuller’s approach was a subversive attack on patriarchal hegemony, yet it was
also subtle and, for that reason, prone to misunderstanding: Harriet Martineau, for
instance, did not appreciate Fuller’s combination of idealism and reformism and
attacked Fuller for the way in which she tackled the issue of women’s rights. As
Emerson recounts in Memoirs, Martineau was initially very fond of Fuller and it was
she who insisted that he and Fuller should meet. The feeling was reciprocated; Fuller
liked Martineau as soon as she met her. She held great memories of their
exchanges, “In that hour, most unexpectedly to me, we passed the barrier that
separates acquaintance from friendship, and I saw how greatly her heart is to be
valued” (MMFO 1:152). However, Martineau’s opinion on Fuller changed over the
years and in her Autobiography (1855), which she wrote twenty years before her
death, she criticised Fuller’s “life in Boston” and defined it “little short of destructive,”
for “In the most pedantic age of society in her own country, and in its most pedantic
city, she who was just beginning to rise out of pedantic habits of thought and speech
relapsed most grievously” (73). Martineau then compared her and Fuller,
The difference between us was that while [Fuller] was living and moving in an
ideal world, talking in private and discoursing in public about the most fanciful
and shallow conceits which the transcendentalists of Boston took for
philosophy, she looked down upon persons who acted instead of talking finely. .
. . While Margaret Fuller and her adult pupils sat ‘gorgeously dressed,’ talking
about Mars and Venus, Plato and Göthe, and fancying themselves the elect of
the earth in intellect and refinement, the liberties of the republic were running
out as fast as they could go. (Autobiography 71)

58



Martineau’s denunciation of Fuller’s strategy consisted in qualifying her idealism as
inaction. She was also irritated by what she called Fuller’s snobbish attitude, both in
terms of manners (sat “gorgeously dressed”) and in looking down on people who
focused on action. Of course, that is a misunderstanding of Fuller’s thinking, for she
was a firm believer in the fact that action should accompany intellect. In hindsight,
Martineau’s comments seem completely unfair, and yet Marshall provides an honest
explanation in her biography as to why Martineau should think so: “Bold as she was
as a thinker and writer, Margaret never considered mounting the podium despite her
extraordinary capacity for extemporaneous speech” (136). Marshall points out that
while in “1839, only a few fervent abolitionist women dared to cross that barrier,
stirring up outrage wherever they held forth, as much for speaking in public as for
their reformist views, . . . Margaret still clung to the few vestiges of Boston prestige
that remained to her, and she continued to emulate an Old World gentility” (136).
Gender not only animated Fuller’s and Emerson’s conversations, but it also
played a decisive role in their understanding of friendship: in the next section of this
chapter, I shall analyse Fuller’s take on friendship in her Dial article “Bettine
Brentano and her Friend Günderode,” showing how gender was a primordial aspect
of her reflection on friendship and comparing her vision with Emerson’s views on
friendship in Memoirs.

59



1.2 “Woman [and] Artist”: Margaret Fuller on Bettine Brentanovon Arnim and Friendship

Conversation was a fundamental aspect of Fuller’s career. Etymologically, the word
comes from Latin “convertere” to turn around, which perfectly encapsulates the life of
a thinker whose work acted as major precursor to America’s first-wave feminism.
Described by Emerson as the best conversationalist in America in Memoirs, Fuller
excelled at this oratory art which defined both her intimate relationships and her
career. Her Boston Conversations allowed her to engage critically with topics such
as “Greek mythology,” “Ethics,” and “Woman,” while remaining within the confines of
what was considered acceptable for women (as opposed to the more “masculine”
lecture). With participants paying a fee, these encounters also enabled Fuller to earn
a living. As Capper explained, “each woman paid ten dollars for a ticket of admission
to the two-hour, thirteen-week series,” which “was over three times what Alcott
brought in . . . from his conversations, and about two-thirds of what Emerson then
made from an equivalent number of lectures” (293). What’s more, Fuller’s writing
was characterised by an innovative “conversational” method: in “Conversation as
Rhetoric,” Judith Mattson Bean describes how Fuller’s “style serves the purpose of
her feminist work” (29) by creating “involvement or engrossment, establish[ing]
bonds of trust, initiat[ing] interaction with the reader, and emphasiz[ing] immediacy,
fluidity, and interaction among multiple voices” (29). Mattson also pinpoints that the
“duality of [Fuller’s] style, integrating formal rhetoric with conversation, provoked

60



criticism for both its informality and its formality” (29). Indeed, many of Fuller’s
contemporaries thought that her written work was highly inferior to her conversation.6
Conversation is also a term that characterises the communities to which Fuller
belonged and in which she revolved, for, as Avallone points out, “Fuller’s discussion
of ‘woman’ entered a dialogue in progress” (337). One of the communities in which
Fuller took great interest, perhaps more than any other Transcendentalist, was that
of German Romantics. A major proponent of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe at a time
when he was under regular attack in America, Fuller translated his Torquato
Tasso (shortening the title to Tasso) sometime around 1833. Unlike her translation of
Johann Peter von Eckermann’s Conversations with Goethe which appeared in 1839,
Fuller’s Tasso was never published in her lifetime except for a few passages which
were included in an 1842 Dial review of a book entitled “Conjectures and
Researches concerning the Love, Madness, and Imprisonment of Torquato Tasso.”
In the same issue of the Dial, Fuller also included a partial translation of Bettine
Brentano-von Arnim’s second epistolary novel Die Günderode (1840),7 which related
her relationship with the Karoline von Günderode.8 It is on that specific work that this
section focuses, aiming to examine Fuller’s rendering of the “friendship” between
these women intellectuals by analysing her article/translation “Bettine Brentano and
Her Friend Günderode” (1842). In this section of Chapter One, I compare Fuller’s
account of the Brentano-Günderode relationship with Emerson’s depiction of Fuller
in Memoirs, focusing specifically on a section entitled “Woman, or Artist?”, in order to

6 Elizabeth Barrett Browning, for instance, thought Fuller’s “writings [were] curiously

inferior to the impressions her conversation gave you” (1:460).
7
Fuller translated the first third of its 600 pages. This was published in 1842 by
Elizabeth Peabody. The last two-thirds were translated by Minna Wesselhoeft and
published in 1861 (Sotiropoulos, “Truth” 36n3).
8 The friendship lasted from 1804 until Günderode’s suicide, in 1806.
61



show how Fuller’s gendered commentary allowed her to resolve the constraining
nineteenth-century dichotomy that weighed on all women writers at the time. Fuller’s
idealisation of the friendship between the two women, I argue, is a celebration of the
transcending power of “life” (intended both as sexual and artistic “reproduction”) and
the way in which she constructs the “interior of German life” around them is a crucial
early expression of both her transcendentalism and her feminism.
Translation was in itself an act of feminist agency: Zwarg notes that “[i]t is
telling that most of her published translations were from German, the one language
she taught herself” (61). For Fuller, learning European languages by herself was an
accomplishment that compensated for the fact that, until 36 years old, she had never
been to Europe—about that, she wrote,
Italian, as well as German, I learned by myself, unassisted, except as to the
pronunciation. I have never been brought into connection with minds trained to
any severity in these kinds of elegant culture. I have used all the means within
my reach, but my not going abroad is an insuperable defect in the technical part
of my education. (MMFO 1:241)
In Feminist Conversations, Zwarg establishes a clear link between translation and
gender, arguing that the dynamics at play in language are also reflective of human
relationships: Fuller, she writes, “understand[ood] that gender itself depended on a
collision of languages, which is another way of saying that a determinate part of our
experience imitates the array of divisions issuing from translation” (60). In her article
on “Goethe,” published in the Dial in July 1841, Fuller reflected on her choice to
translate a few excerpts of Goethe’s Iphigenia (1779) noting that like “all pure
productions of genius, this may be injured by the slightest change, and I dare not
flatter myself that the English words give an idea of the heroic dignity expressed in

62



the cadence of the original” (25). Fuller’s caution as a translator is palpable, and her
meta-commentary shows the real breadth of her commitment as a vector of German
literature. Karen English calls Fuller a “cultural mediator” for her “interest in Latin,
French, German, and Italian went beyond the scholarly acquisition of language or
the academic study of literature; she wanted to act as . . . promoter, of various
cultures to a circle of private friends and subsequently for her public readers” (145).
In her review of Die Günderode, Fuller’s role of “cultural mediator” positions her at
the intersection of gender, nationality, and age—“I have followed as much as
possible the idiom of the writer as well as her truly girlish punctuation. Commas and
dashes are the only stops natural to girls; their sentences flow on in little minim
ripples, unbroken as the brook in a green field unless by some slight waterfall or jet
of Ohs and Ahs” (“Brentano” 8). In this passage, Fuller does not linger on the
linguistic challenges of bringing a German text to an American audience; instead,
she celebrates the “girlish” style of Brentano’s exchanges, which she views as the
mark of their uniqueness, as well as the young age of its authors (“girls”), which in
turn becomes responsible for charming stylistic features (“their sentences flow on in
little minim ripples”).
After writing two articles on Goethe9 which both appeared in the Dial—
“Menzel’s View of Goethe by Margaret Fuller” in January 1841 and “Goethe,” which
Emerson deemed “on many accounts, her best paper” (MMFO 1:244)—Fuller turned
to Brentano-von Arnim, a figure very close to the German thinker. Author of Goethe’s
Correspondence with a Child (1835), which Fuller described as “genuine transcripts
of private experience” (“Brentano” 3), Bettine was in fact an intimate friend of the

9 These two would be followed the next year by a brief commentary on a translation of

“Goethe’s ‘Egmont’,” which appeared in the Dial in January 1842.
63



famous writer. As Fuller recounted, “Bettine, belonging to a large and wealthy family
of extensive commercial connexions, and seeing at the house of grandmother Me.
La Roche, most of the distinguished literati of the time, as well as those noble and
princely persons who were proud to do honor to letters, if they did not professedly
cultivate them, brings before us a much wider circle” (“Brentano” 4). Bettine was the
sister of Romantic writer Clemens Brentano, the wife of Achim von Arnim, also
famous for his poetry and novel writing, and the granddaughter of the pre-Romantic
popular novelist, Sophie von La Roche. Bettine’s mother, Maximiliane, and Goethe
had been friends—however, the friendship ended abruptly and 35 years later her
daughter took her place. Brentano idolized Goethe (who was 57 when she first met
him); she had frequently visited Goethe’s mother in Frankfurt and recorded tales of
the poet’s childhood.
To Goethe’s Correspondence with a Child, Fuller, however, preferred von
Arnim’s Die Günderode published five years later. In a journal entry written in
February 1841, she noted “I meant to have translated the best passages of ‘Die
Günderode,’ - which I prefer to Bettine's correspondence with Goethe. The two girls
are equal natures, and both in earnest” (MMFO 2:58). Fuller perceived a sense of
balance between the two female friends which she did not otherwise see in Bettine’s
relationship with Goethe. In the preface of Günderode, a longer version of her Dial
article that was published by Elizabeth Peabody, Fuller declared “as the loveliest
woman is better seen in the love she inspires in some heroic man, than in anything
done or said by herself, so we see Günderode even better in her influence on Bettine
than in her own letters” (vii). This quote, I argue, exemplifies the subversion and
suppression of male authority by Fuller, who in her essay “Bettine Brentano and Her

64



Friend Günderode” creatively replaces the need for “some heroic man” (note the
ironically vague adjective “some”) with a celebration of two female artists.
In this section, I shall first comment on the fact that Fuller used two male
figures, Goethe and Emerson, as foils for her portrayal of the Brentano-Günderode
friendship. As she wrote in her “Günderode” article, “the relation in which [Bettine]
stands to Goethe is not a beautiful one” (1), “it is too unequal” (2). In her journal, she
noted more bluntly that “Goethe [had] made a puppet-show, for his private
entertainment, of Bettine's life” (MMFO 2:58). Commenting on the notion of
“friendship,” Fuller was critical of such imbalance: comparing Bettine with George
Sand, she located the source of her discontent in the former’s lack of self-esteem,
and wrote in 1839, “When I first knew George Sand, I thought to have found tried the
experiment I wanted. I did not value Bettine so much. She had not pride enough for
me. . . . I love ‘abandon’ only when natures are capable of the extreme reverse. I
know Bettine would end in nothing; when I read her book I knew she could not
outlive her love” (MMFO 1:248). Emerson, too, compared “our wonderful Bettine”
with Sand: he wrote in a letter to John Heath in 1842, “we are indebted to her for the
most remarkable book ever written by a woman. She is a finer genius than George
Sand or Mme de Stael . . . And where shall we find another woman to compare her
with” (EL 3:77). However, his laudatory remarks did not include the same criticism
that Fuller reserved towards Bettine’s “abandonment,” which she commented again
on in 1842 writing that “her boundless abandonment to one feeling must hinder for a
time her progress and that her maturer years are likely to lag slowly after the fiery
haste of her youth. She lived so long, not for truth, but for a human object”
(“Brentano” 3).

65



Secondly, I shall focus on Emerson’s section in Memoirs “Woman, or Artist?”
and examine Fuller’s and Emerson’s different understanding of such a dichotomy.
After he was asked “to write some Life of Margaret” in 1850, Emerson explained to
his friend Samuel Gray Ward on August 2nd, “I think it could really be done, if one
would heroically devote himself, and a most vivacious book written, but it must done
tête exaltée, & in the tone of Spiridion, or even of Bettine” (EL 4:222). Two years
later, he confessed to Furness that a “great deal of labor [had been] bestowed to a
very small effect” (Fruitlands). In the end, Emerson did not manage to narrate
Fuller’s life “in the tone of . . . Bettine,” and the sense of disappointment underlying
Emerson’s remarks matches most readers’ reaction to reading Memoirs, a work that
struggles to represent the radicalism of her career and feminist work.
On the contrary, Fuller’s Dial article “Bettine Brentano and her Friend
Günderode” does not shy away from these women’s nonconformist agency. The last
part of this section centres on Fuller’s powerful reflection on friendship and, more
particularly, on how she portrays the harmonious Brentano-Günderode relationship
as both intrinsically feminine and “essentially poetic.”

I – Of Women and Men, Of Friends and Foils
A) Goethe as Foil: Circles and the Ambivalent Power of Influence
One thing that Brentano’s and Goethe’s relationship lacked according to Fuller was a
sense of balance—and it is on that lack of balance that Fuller’s essay first centres,
focusing on Bettine’s fascination for the writer and leaving Karoline aside.
Günderode is indeed curiously absent from the beginning of Fuller’s text, which
opens on the dangers of idolatrous relationships. While noting that “[i]dolatries are
natural to youthful hearts,” Fuller states that “when this worship is expressed, there

66



must be singular purity and strength of character on the part both of Idol and Idolater,
to prevent its degenerating into a mutual excitement of vanity or mere infatuation”
(“Brentano” 2). As she wrote in 1839, Fuller believed that Bettine’s fascination with
Goethe was one that had “degenerated” for characterised by a very uneven balance
of power—“She has followed like a slave where she might as a pupil” (3). Zwarg
hypothesizes on the origins of Fuller’s interesting word choice, noting that
Fuller's insertion of the words captive and slave can be said to provide a
feminist gloss to Hegel's treatment of Lordship and Bondage in the
Phenomenology of Spirit (1807). It is possible she had heard something about
this aspect of Hegel's thought from her friend Frederick Henry Hedge, whose
command of German and interest in philosophy made him a particularly useful
contact. (76)
As the word “slave” implies, Bettine was actually the victim in Fuller’s eyes—and
Goethe, the perpetrator. In her essay on Die Günderode, Fuller is indeed highly
critical of his condescending attitude toward Bettine—“there is an air as of an elderly
guardian flirting cautiously with a giddy, inexperienced ward, or a Father Confessor,
who, instead of through the holy office raising and purifying the thoughts of the
devotee, uses it to gratify his curiosity” (“Brentano” 1). What Fuller is describing or
denouncing here is a case of abuse of power—a power granted by experience (the
“elderly guardian” versus the “inexperienced ward”) and by status (“a Father
Confessor” using the “devotee”). For Carol Strauss Sotiropoulos, “Fuller dethrones
Goethe as male hero,” and her article shows that “Fuller’s transformation pertained
not only to breaking through values imposed by patriarchy but also to revaluing the
importance of female friendship in the process of deconstructing her ideal male hero”
(Toward 84). Surely, Fuller’s denunciation confirms what she herself wrote in the

67



“Preface” of her translation of Eckermann’s Conversations in 1839—that although
Goethe was “an object of peculiar interest and constant study” (175), she was “not a
blind admirer” of his (Chevigny 180). However, Fuller also praised Goethe’s
influence, which she viewed as the aura of the Romantic thinker par excellence.
Originally denoting “an influx, flowing matter” or “the flowing in of ethereal
fluid,” the word “influence” perfectly describes the nature of Goethe’s effect on
Bettine according to Fuller. It is indeed Goethe’s “atmosphere” (from the Greek
“atmós,” meaning steam, vapor) that caused Bettine’s fascination,
She [Bettine] had grown up in the atmosphere he [Goethe] had created. Seeing
him up there on the mountain, he seemed to her all beautiful and majestic in
the distant rosy light of its snow-peaks. Add a nature, like one of his own
melodies, as subtle, as fluent, and as productive of minute flowers and mosses,
we could not wonder if one so fitted to receive him, had made of her whole life
a fair sculptured pedestal for this one figure. (“Brentano” 2)
The words “atmosphere”, the series of adjectives “subtle,” “fluent,” “beautiful,”
“majestic,” and the reference to “nature” and “flowers and mosses,” as well as the
idea of elevation suggested by the noun phrases “up there on the mountain,” “a fair
sculpture pedestal,” all partake of a kind of impressionistic and Romantic portrait of
the German writer. Goethe’s charming hue absorbed Bettine and seems at first to
have taken away both agency and responsibility from her. This description
resembles a passage in Fuller’s article on “Goethe” published in 1841. Just as
Emerson had written about conversation, which he defined as a “game of circles”
(CW 2:184), for Fuller, Goethe’s genius consisted in a certain kind of “circle”:
I never felt so completely that very thing which genius should always make us
feel, that I was in its circle, and could not get out till its spell was done, and its

68



last spirit permitted to depart. I was not carried away, instructed, delighted more
than by other works, but I was there, living there, whether as the platan tree, or
the architect, or any other observing part of the scene. The personages live too
intensely to let us live in them, they draw around themselves circles within the
circle, we can only see them close, not be themselves. (“Goethe” 20-21)
The circle, to which the etymology of the word “conversation” perfectly alludes, was a
fundamental aspect of Fuller’s Transcendentalism: she believed that it was indeed
by expanding one’s “circle” to new horizons (which explains her thirst to travel to
Europe) that the individual could grow. She writes “where to find fit, though few,
representatives for all we value in humanity? Where obtain those golden keys to the
secret treasure-chambers of the soul? No samples are perfect. We must look abroad
into the wide circle, to seek a little here, and a little there, to make up our company”
(MMFO 2:297). Fuller continued to expand her circle throughout her life, through a
series of geographical moves—first to New York, and then to Italy—which matched
an internal sort of growth, “I have no castle, and no natural circle, in which I might
live, like the wise Makaria, observing my kindred the stars, and gradually enriching
my archives. Makaria here must go abroad, or the stars would hide their light, and
the archive remain a blank” (MMFO 2:297).
While the atmosphere of Goethe’s genius absorbed Bettine almost in spite of
herself, Fuller’s “Brentano” article suggests that the same halo of charm applied to
Günderode too: “Many of the poetical fragments from the pen of Günderode are
such as would not have been written had she not been the contemporary of
Schelling and Fichte, yet are they native and original, the atmosphere of thought
reproduced in the brilliant and delicate hues of a peculiar plant” (“Brentano” 5). We
find similar terms as in the previous passage—“atmosphere,” “hues”, “plant”—and

69



yet we understand that the “transfusion of such energies” does not imply a loss of
agency for Fuller, who on the contrary defines Günderode’s work as “[n]ative and
original.”
B) On Goethe and Emerson: “Intellect” and “Life”
As the critics of Fuller’s “Brentano” essay have already established, there are
numerous parallels between the way in which she writes about Goethe and Brentano
and her own relationship with Emerson. Written two years after their famous crisis,
Fuller’s comments on Goethe are indeed reminiscent of the problems she faced in
her friendship with Emerson. About Goethe, Fuller writes that he “is so cold, so
repulsive, diplomatic, and courteously determined not to compromise himself. Had
he assumed truly the paternal attitude, he might have been far more gentle and
tender” (“Brentano” 2). Coldness was something that bothered Fuller tremendously
in her relationship with Emerson, to the point that in Memoirs, he defined their “war
of temperaments” as follows: “Our moods were very different; and I remember, that,
at the very time when I, slow and cold, had come fully to admire her genius, and was
congratulating myself on the solid good understanding that subsisted between us, I
was surprised with hearing it taxed by her with superficiality and halfness” (MMFO
1:288). Taking inspiration from their relationship to write about friendship was
something both Fuller and Emerson undertook. Emerson’s essay “Friendship,”
published in 1841, drew largely on his exchange with Fuller: in a letter written in July
1840, he asked her “Do you happen to possess unto this day,- as I have heard you
say, you keep letters,- an old one from me dated 12 Oct, 1838. I have quoted a
sentence out of it into my journal which makes me think I may find a word there to fill
up a bad hole in a paragraph” (EL 2:314). Similarly, in 1842, Fuller’s comments on
friendship seem to have been nourished by her recent falling out with Emerson: her

70



remarks about Bettine’s frustration sound very autobiographical, “We also feel as if
she [Bettine] became too self-conscious in the course of this intimacy. There being
no response from the other side to draw her out naturally, she bunts about for means
to entertain a lordly guest, who brings nothing to the dinner but a silver fork”
(“Brentano” 3). Fuller’s conclusion is tinted by a bitterness that seems to reflect her
own sufferance, “Sad are the catastrophes of friendships, for they are mostly
unequal, and it is rare that more than one party keeps true to the original covenant.
Happy the survivor if in losing his friend, he loses not the idea of friendship”
(“Brentano” 6). The emotional hardship of friendship is what emerges most strongly
out of these remarks; the adjectives “sad” and “happy” encircle Fuller’s reflection and
indicate the rawness of her recent disappointment. But as Zwarg states, Fuller's
1842 Dial article “did not register a turn from her relationship with Emerson so much
as an enhancement of that relationship in allegorical form” (87). There are passages
in which Fuller envisages a happy ending; she is indeed not hopeless and addresses
herself directly to the similarly discouraged reader to reassure them—“Be not
faithless, thou whom I see wandering alone amid the tombs of thy buried loves. The
relation thou hast thus far sought in vain is possible even on earth to calm, profound,
tender, and unselfish natures; it is assured in heaven, where only chastened spirits
can enter, — pilgrims dedicate to Perfection” (“Brentano” 6). The confusion between
Fuller and her audience (to whom she addresses herself directly, “thou whom I see
wandering alone”) speaks to that connection that Fuller “the translator” wanted to
establish with her readers, but it also establishes a very intimate sort of link between
the two because, by prophesizing a happy ending to the disappointed reader, Fuller
is simultaneously promising herself the prospect of a more successful friendship still
to come.

71



That being said, I believe that the parallels between Goethe and Emerson that
Fuller establishes in her reflection on friendship extend beyond the factuality of
personal misunderstandings. Fuller’s critique of Goethe as a friend of Bettine, which
reads as a reflection of her critique of Emerson as her friend, is crucial not only
because it acts as a foil to her praise of Günderode and Brentano’s relationship but
also because it concurrently captures a fundamental aspect of Fuller’s
Transcendentalism—i.e. the tension between “intellect” and “life.” About Goethe, she
writes,
Of Goethe, as of other natures, where the intellect is too much developed in
proportion to the moral nature, it is difficult to speak without seeming narrow,
blind, and impertinent. For such men see all that others live . . . . Yet they are
not, nay know not, they only discern. The difference is that between sight and
life, prescience and being, wisdom and love. Thus with Goethe. Naturally of a
deep mind and shallow heart, he felt the sway of the affections enough to
appreciate their working in other men, but never enough to receive their inmost
regenerating influence. (“Goethe” 1)
In this excerpt from Fuller’s 1841 article, sight is elevated to the point where it is
presented as characteristic of Goethe’s genius, of which “it is difficult to speak
without seeming narrow, blind, and impertinent.” Goethe belongs to that category of
people who are different precisely because “such men see all that others live”: these
men are above others, and they stand in a higher position from which they can
observe reality with a certain distance. However, for Fuller, the capacity of “seeing” is
also synonymous with a certain lack of “being”: “they are not, nay know not, they
only discern,” “he felt the sway of the affections enough to appreciate their working in
other men, but never enough to receive their inmost regenerating influence.”

72



Etymologically related to the notion of “separation,” discernment is what prevents this
type of person from uniting affectionally with others.
This characterisation of Goethe cannot be read without also quoting the
aforementioned line that Fuller addressed to Emerson “You are intellect, I am life”
(FL 3:209). The tension between “intellect” and “life” was indeed a leitmotif of the
Fuller-Emerson relationship, which was strained by their different personalities.
Elsewhere, Fuller commented—“He has little sympathy with mere life: does not
seem to see the plants grow, merely that he may rejoice in their energy” (WNC 184).
Contrary to Emerson, to whom she attributed the role of the observer (one who is
gratified through observation), Fuller positioned herself on the side of “life” and of the
“plants [that] grow.” Caleb Crain, commenting on Fuller’s remarks on Plato in a letter
to Caroline Sturgis from 1839, writes that the “real, including the indelicacy and pain
of human relationships, was not a thing to be overcome. That was not how Fuller
understood transcendence. Rather, the antagonism between real and ideal had to be
fully lived” (197). The tension between “real” and “ideal”, which we might also
connect with the dichotomous opposition between human reproduction and artistic
production, is at the heart of Emerson’s section “Woman, or Artist?” in Memoirs.

II – Woman, or Artist: A Dichotomy?
A) “Children of Human Birth” and “Children of the Muse”
Creation acts indeed as the main focus of Emerson’s section “Woman, or Artist?” in
Memoirs. Separated by a comma, the words “woman” and “artist” stand in apparent
opposition to each other, while the question mark included in the title suggests the
presumed impossibility of being both “woman” and “artist.” This section of Memoirs is
quite similar in its structure to the rest of the work—Emerson’s commentary frames

73



quotations taken from Fuller’s letters and journals. The passages written by Emerson
in this specific section centre on the tension between ideal and real—a tension which
echoes the title “woman, or artist.” “Art” could refer to both “craftsmanship” and
“higher art.” But here—opposed to “woman,” a term which was mostly tied to the
idea of domesticity in the mid-nineteenth century—it denotes a certain elevated
detachment from everyday life. In Emerson’s words, this tension is expressed
through the contrast between what he calls the “disappointing forms of men and
women” and “the children of the muse.” He writes,
Margaret resolved, again and again, to devote herself no more to these
disappointing forms of men and women, but to the children of the muse. ‘The
dramatis personœ,' she said, ‘of my poems shall henceforth be chosen from
the children of immortal Muse. I fix my affections no more on these frail forms.'
But it was vain; she rushed back again to persons, with a woman's devotion.
(MMFO 1:294)
While the expression “children of the muse” associates the reproductive power of
woman to the idealised female figure, the final clauses—especially the adjective
“vain” and the noun phrase “a woman’s devotion”—portray in a much more negative
light a vision of womanhood that is linked to the physical world (“men and women” as
opposed to “the children of the immortal Muse”).
Childbirth and childcare are aspects of a woman’s life that Bettine Brentano
experienced very early on: married to Achim von Arnim in 1811, Bettine had seven
children with him before he died in 1831. She was familiar with and had an obvious
first-hand experience of the toll of domestic duties on women: alongside being a
mother, she became an influential writer and political thinker. Seen as particularly
controversial at the time of its publication, Brentano’s The King’s Book (1843)

74



“exposed social conditions and promulgated the vision of a freer society [and for that]
von Arnim was perceived as an oppositionist and admired by freedom seekers
despite the fact that the means the book advocated were not revolutionary”
(Sotiropoulos, “Truth” 36-37). As Fry remarks, “aspiring authors like Fuller possessed
few examples of female artists who transcended established social roles and who
expressed creative genius as defined in romantic discourse” (251). Bettine was, at
least in some respects, a model of bravery and intellect that Fuller admired, as
shown by a letter she wrote to her on November 2 nd, 1840:
I write to you in the name of many men and many women of my country for
whom you have wrought wonders. . . . Thou art dear to us, thou art the friend of
our inmost mood. We do not wish to hear street gossip about thee. We will not
hear it. Speak to us thyself [for] you are wise, you have the spiritual sight, the
breath of our love will be wafted to you and you will see whether we are yours.
(FL 2:328-329)
It is important to emphasise that Fuller wrote to Bettine using the first-person plural
pronoun “we” as if, while showing her admiration, she was also expressing America’s
gratitude for Bettine’s service. Service to whom, we might ask. To intellect and to the
cause of women’s rights: Bettine was a rare example of a successful woman
intellectual but, above all, she was a prime example of someone who had a “spiritual
sight.” While Fuller had taxed Goethe of feeling “the sway of the affections enough to
appreciate their working in other men, but never enough to receive their inmost
regenerating influence (“Goethe” 1), Bettine had on the other hand become the
friend of readers’ “inmost mood.”
However laudatory this may have been, this is a letter to which Brentano
never replied: Sotiropoulos interrogates Fuller’s silence on Brentano in the years that

75



followed her 1842 Dial article, noting that “Fuller never referred to or attempted to
communicate with von Arnim again” (“Truth” 36). Sotiropoulos indeed “invite[s] one
to ask why Fuller fell off the von Arnim fan wagon” (“Truth” 36-37) but recognises
that one can only speculate as to the real answer to that question. Despite not being
a mother until she was 38, Fuller herself, like Bettine, knew what it meant to bear the
responsibility of a household. At age twenty-five, upon her father’s death (1835),
Fuller shouldered heavy responsibility for her mother and five younger siblings. If by
“artist” we mean an intellectual, then Fuller had to find ways to fructify such a
speculative position in order to survive as a woman in the nineteenth century.
In the section “Woman, or Artist?”, Emerson reports a comment that Fuller
made on the importance of “living” in December 1842,
I have been reading the lives of Lord Herbert of Cherbury, and of Sir Kenelm
Digby. These splendid, chivalrous, and thoughtful Englishmen are meat which
my soul loveth, even as much as my Italians. What I demand of men, - that they
could act out all their thoughts, - these have. They are lives; and of such I do
not care if they had as many faults as there are days in the year, - there is the
energy to redeem them. (MMFO 1:294-295)
This passage shows the importance as well as the meaning of “living” in Fuller’s
eyes. It is the capacity for “enaction” that Fuller admired in these men—“They are
lives,” she writes, precisely because they are able to “act out all their thoughts.” It is
interesting to note that, in Memoirs, Emerson links the concept of “action” to Fuller
but he presents it in a negative light—there were “practical problems Margaret had to
entertain and to solve the best way she could. . . . But she was formed for action,
and addressed herself quite simply to her part. She was a woman, an orphan,
without beauty, without money” (1:297-298). There is, then, both in Emerson’s and

76



Fuller’s writing, a parallel that is established between artistic creation and human
reproduction. This parallel is a trope that is not infrequent but it is particularly
important for it seems to encapsulate all the difficulties linked to the status of women
intellectuals and to how their lives were narrated (as in Fuller’s “Brentano” article and
in Emerson’s Memoirs).
Fuller’s remarks about her own writing (i.e. artistic creation), which Emerson
quotes in Memoirs, are unsurprisingly concerned with the ties between artistic
creation and gender—"a woman of tact and brilliancy, like me, has an undue
advantage in conversation with men” (295) and "gentlemen are surprised that I write
no better, because I talk so well. But I have served a long apprenticeship to the one,
none to the other” (MMFO 1:296). Her comments also reveal the difficulty of being
both a woman and an artist, “One should be either private or public. I love best to be
a woman; but womanhood is at present too straitly-bounded to give me scope. At
hours, I live truly as a woman; at others, I should stifle; as, on the other hand, I
should palsy, when I would play the artist” (MMFO 1:297). This tension between
“public” and “private” is the same on which gender discrimination based itself for a
long time (women’s world coinciding with the private sphere, while men were in
charge of the public sphere).
B) Artistic Creation and Women’s Liberation: Bettine and Karoline According
to Fuller
By publishing her letter exchange with her friend Karoline, Bettine had, in some
ways, managed to redefine woman’s private life by equating it to genius rather than
to domesticity. She provided an insight into the “interior of German life” which
fascinated Fuller to the point, perhaps, of blinding her a little about the reality of
German society—“not only are these letters interesting as presenting this view of the

77



interior of German life, and of an ideal relation realized, but the high state of culture
in Germany . . . had made them expressions of the noblest aspirations” (“Brentano”
5). Fuller’s deep admiration for Bettine’s letters also resulted in an idealisation of
German domestic life—“We think with unmingled pleasure of the two seated together
beside the stove in Günderode's little room, walking in Madame La Roche's garden,
where they ‘founded a religion for a young prince,’ or on the Rhine, or in the old
castle on the hill, as described in the following beautiful letters” (“Brentano” 7).
Fuller’s admiration for Die Günderode is palpable throughout her review as she
celebrates the literary exploit that such book represented. As Fry states, the “primary
problem for women who like Fuller and Brentano-von Arnim wanted to enter the
male-dominated sphere of literary production lay in confronting notions of feminine
identity that promoted a passive and domestic role for women rather than an
intellectually active and liberated one” (247). Bettine had taken self-writing and
artistic creation into her own hands by publishing her 1804–1806 correspondence
with Günderode, commencing when von Arnim was nineteen, thus thirty-four years
before von Arnim’s 1840 publication. As Sotiropoulos indicates, the “title of the
epistolary novel is somewhat misleading, as the letters from Bettine far outnumber
those from Karoline: thirty-seven from Bettine, twenty-three from Karoline. Thus
Bettine is very much a subject and object of her own book, along with Karoline”
(Toward 82). The agency of such literary production certainly satisfied Fuller’s
feminism.
Unlike the toxic Brentano-Goethe relationship on which Brentano’s first
epistolary novel focused, Fuller viewed the friendship “Bettine” and “Karoline” as a
much more balanced type of relationship. Indeed, Fuller’s article reads as a
celebration of the notion of harmony—intended as complementarity rather than

78



similarity—on which Fuller writes, “[t]he advantage in years, the higher culture, and
greater harmony of Günderode’s nature is counter-balanced, by the ready springing
impulse; richness and melody of the other” (5). Musical harmony (alluded to through
the words “melody,” “springing impulse,” “richness”) is used to characterise the
friendship between the two women who, despite embodying “two different modes of
life,” are “the two beautiful figures which animate and portray these modes of life
[and] are in perfect harmony with them” (4). Günderode herself, of a more “delicate
and reserved nature” than Bettine, wrote “[t]hou hast a much more energetic nature
than I, indeed than almost any of whom I am able to judge” (Fuller, “Brentano” 23).
However, Fuller notes that these differences constituted “no drawback upon the
beauty of this intimacy—there being sufficient nearness of age to give Günderode
just the advantage needful with so daring a child as Bettine, and a sufficient equality
in every other respect” (6). Once again, this contrasts with Brentano’s age difference
from Goethe, who was 26 years older than her.
Difference, just like harmony, is a key concept in Fuller’s commentary on
friendship for, while Fuller begins by opposing the relationship between Goethe and
Bettine to the latter’s friendship with Karoline, she then goes on to interpret the
“difference” between the women as follows,
I have . . . distinguished the two as Nature and Ideal. Bettine, hovering from
object to object, drawing new tides of vital energy from all, . . .— is not this
pervasive vital force, cause of the effect which we call nature? And Günderode,
. . . harmonizing all objects into their true relations, drawing from every form of
life its eternal meaning. (4)
What emerges from this important passage is the transformational power of woman’s
genius: “difference” between two friends can be positive, manifesting itself as a

79



“pervasive force” that “transfigures[s],” “harmonizing” and “drawing new tides of vital
energy.” What’s more, Fuller depicts this transformational force by the two women as
creative and reciprocal—“The action of these two beings upon one another, as
representing classes of thoughts, is thus of the highest poetical significance. As
persons, their relation is not less beautiful” (“Brentano” 5). Here, the notion of
“action” and of “poetry” come together in this “woman-centered, spiritual alternative”
(Avallone 339) to Romantic, male poetic creation.
Several years before she wrote her Dial article, Fuller had told Emerson during
one of her stays at his Concord house—“Who would be a goody that could be a
genius?” (EJ 5:40). While with that remark Fuller “seemed to dismiss the notions of
separate roles or separate spheres for women,” as pinpointed by Barbara Packer
(801), her article on Die Günderode actually places gender at the centre of her
reasoning, celebrating the all-female power of the Brentano-Günderode relationship.
Fuller describes their “relation” as “present[ing] all that is lovely between woman and
woman, adorned by great genius and beauty on both sides” (“Brentano” 5). Gender
is thus central to her commentary of this “true friendship” (6) between young women,
which Fuller clearly distinguishes from the friendship between two young men:
An intimacy between two young men is heroic. . . . As the life of man is to be
active, they have still more the air of brothers in arms than of fellow students.
But the relation between two young girls is essentially poetic. . . . There is a
fluent tenderness, a native elegance in the arrangement of trifling incidents, a
sincere childlike sympathy in aspirations that mark the destiny of woman. She
should be the poem, man the poet. (“Brentano” 5)
Poetry, as creation, is therefore for Fuller a power emanating from true female
relationships, while action seems to more characteristic of male friendships. If

80



Sotiropoulos argues that “[f]or Fuller, the transformational potential inhering in female
friendship complicated the principle of self-reliance inculcated by her father,
manifested in her male literary and historical heroes, and formulated into a
philosophy by Emerson” (Toward 84), I think that the “transformational potential” of
Fuller’s vision lies in the redefinition of friendship between women as “essentially
poetic.” After all, “poetry” comes from “poiein” to make, linking elevation through art
to the idea of action. For Fuller, Karoline and Bettine’s relationship was a creative
sort of union that combined artistic production and intellectual elevation. This is
reiterated by Fuller as she compares Cleone and Aspasia, in Walter Savage
Landor’s work, to Bettine and Karoline—“Aspasia and Cleone is not unlike this
between Bettine and Günderode, in the influences of the two characters upon one
another” (“Brentano” 20). Fuller expands on this comparison by describing how,
while “Bettine feels in her friend the same joy and pride which is expressed in
Aspasia. . . Cleone regards Aspasia with the same admiration, angelic in its pure
humility, though melancholy in its smile, as Günderode does Bettine” (“Brentano”
21). And yet Fuller concludes that the “book of ‘Günderode’ is more poetic than
‘Pericles and Aspasia,’ in this, that we see living and changing before us what is only
given us as results, of fixed outline in Landor’s book. This breathing life makes us
living; that pictured life only commanded us to live” (“Brentano” 21). Not only is
creation a property of the Günderode-Brentano relationship, but Fuller concludes
that it is also transformative for us readers who benefit from that relation by “living”
through it and with it.

Fuller’s idealisation of the friendship between Bettine Brentano-von Arnim and
Karoline von Günderode celebrates female artistic genius in a way that frees it

81



completely from male domination. Creation is described as a female and essentially
poetic property: Fuller’s redefinition of “womanhood” indeed blurs the lines between
artistic creation and human reproduction. Bettine’s book, Fuller writes, “is true, and of
the rarest excellence, a many-petalled flower on the bosom of nature, from which the
dew shall never vanish” (“Brentano” 23). Nature pervades Fuller’s characterisations,
in which the beauty of the natural world merges with literary production—“Like the
sky lark’s, these morning songs drop from the clouds which upbear the songster dew
from heaven, such as active, lustrous, enduring, prying day shall never boast”
(“Brentano” 23). If in one of her letters (translated here by Fuller), Günderode wrote
that if Bettine had “been a boy, thou wouldst have become a hero, but as thou art a
girl I interpret all these dispositions as furnishing materials for a future life,
preparation for an energetic character which perhaps in a living active time will be
born” (“Brentano” 24), Fuller suppresses the need for any model of male authority
and celebrates the literary and transcending power of a woman’s life.
The vision of womanhood that emerges from Fuller’s account of the BrentanoGünderode friendship offers a liberating perspective on the status of women
intellectuals in the nineteenth century. In the next section of this chapter, I expand
my reflection on Transcendentalism and gender by reading Sophia Ripley’s Dial
article “Woman” and examining the way in which she resolves the ideal-real
womanhood—a dichotomy in which Emerson, while writing Memoirs, remained very
much entrapped.

82



1.3 Transcendentalists in Conversation: Margaret Fuller, Sophia
Ripley, and “Woman”
American female writers who fought for women’s rights in the first half of the
nineteenth century did so in many different ways for, beyond the shared belief that
social and intellectual discrimination of woman should end, every writer seemed to
have her own idea about how greater equality should be achieved. Lydia Maria
Child, for instance, did not always agree with how her contemporaries were trying to
redefine gender. The New-Englander author of Letters from New-York (1841–43)
noted that “much of the talk about Women’s Rights offends both my reason and my
taste. I am not of those who maintain that there is no sex in souls” (250). While she
believed that there were essential differences between man and woman, Child
insisted that those should not be used to justify the subordination of the latter. She
denounced men’s uncontrolled tendency to aggression, lamenting “[t]hat animal
instinct and brute force now govern the world, is painfully apparent in the condition of
women everywhere” (247), and aligned herself with women’s rights precursor Mary
Wollstonecraft, who first ascertained that in order to revolutionize the condition of
woman one should also rethink the role of man.10
Fuller also admired Wollstonecraft, to whom she paid tribute in Woman,
describing her as a “woman whose existence better proved the need of some new
interpretation of Woman’s Rights than anything she wrote” (75). However, contrary to
what Child or other contemporaries of Fuller such as Elizabeth Peabody argued

10 See “Hailing a New Man: The Rights of Women, Constructions of Masculinity and

Solidarity” by Katharina Rennhak, in which she “suggest[s] that in Rights of Woman
and Wrongs of Woman Wollstonecraft invests quite some energy in the project of
reforming heterosexual males, since without a reconstruction of masculinity the
‘revolution in female manners’ does not seem possible” (183).
83



against,11 Fuller was very radical in her understanding of gender. Blurring the lines
between man and woman’s “separate spheres,” she exposed gender as a social
construct thus anticipating modern gender theories by over a century. Of course, a
chorus of women thinkers both preceded and inspired Fuller’s ground-breaking
treatise Woman as well “The Great Lawsuit.” As showcased by Phyllis Cole in
“Fuller’s Lawsuit and Feminist History,” works by sisters Sarah and Angelina Grimké
as well as, of course, Wollstonecraft are echoed in Fuller’s writing.
Despite adopting different approaches to the notion of gender, the texts
written in the period leading up to the first women’s movement appear to have been
“in conversation” with one another—a mode of exchange by which I mean the ripple
effect of mutually inspiring works by women thinkers that also prompted similarly
related discussions between women and men. Some of these discussions were
formally organized, as is the case for Fuller’s Boston Conversations for which
participants paid a fee, while others took the form of epistolary exchanges or of
intimate conversations that were later recorded in journal entries. This section
focuses on Sophia Ripley’s article “Woman,” which was published in the Dial in
January 1841 when Fuller was the editor, with a view to placing Ripley among that
chorus of women’s rights defenders. Two years before “The Great Lawsuit”
appeared in the same publication, Ripley called her readers to recognise that “All
adjusting of the whole sex to a sphere is vain, for no two persons naturally have the
same” and asserted that “[c]haracter, intellect create the sphere of each” (362).
Opposing the predominant assumption that women belonged to a “separate” (and
inherently inferior) sphere, Ripley’s powerful denunciation of well-established social

11 For a comparison of Peabody’s and Fuller’s views, see Judith Strong Albert’s “The

Debate in Women’s Studies: Contradictory Role Models in the Nineteenth Century Margaret Fuller and Elizabeth Peabody.”
84



conventions engages in conversation with the work of other Transcendentalist
authors such as Fuller and Emerson in order to comment on issues related to
woman’s individuality and education.
Ripley’s article originated from her participation in Fuller’s Boston
Conversations. Conversation was a type of exchange that Transcendentalists prized
immensely: as Bruce Ronda notes, “[c]onversations, in their efforts to follow rules of
engagement and their attempts to achieve brief collective harmony, together with
their frequent breakdowns as codes shifted and participants broke out of their roles,
may in fact be understood as the quintessential Transcendentalist expressive form”
(21-22). It is therefore no coincidence that Fuller chose that specific mode of
communication for her project of conversations for women, whose goal was to
“suppl[y] a point of union to well-educated and thinking women, in a city which, with
great pretensions to mental refinement, boasts, at present, nothing of the kind”
(WNC 173), as she explained in a letter to Ripley in August 1839. Education for girls
stood at the very heart of Fuller’s call for women’s rights. In fact, she believed it unChristian to deny anyone an education, for enforced ignorance constituted, in her
opinion, a rejection of God-given intellectual capabilities. After attending the
eighteenth conversation, Peabody reported that “Miss Fuller thought it impious thus
to speak of the gifts of God - immortal gifts of God - as if we had a right to tamper
with them” (Simmons 217). In line with William Ellery Channing’s principle of “selfculture,” Fuller relied on the latter’s famous call to use our “nobler power, that of
acting on, determining and forming ourselves” (11) in order to subvert the hegemonic
masculine discourse of her times.
Now regarded as an extraordinary example of early feminist initiative, Fuller’s
encounters encouraged her female audience to reflect critically on all topics,

85



including on “woman.” As Rula Quawas pinpoints, the Conversations had a
performative value for, “like contemporary lectures, [they] not only engaged the
audience in a process marked by intellectual and emotional reciprocity, but they also
supplied access to education from which women were excluded” (135). Originally
written as homework for one of these sessions, Ripley’s article deserves our
attention for how powerfully it debunks the general assumptions about women that
routinely circulated in antebellum America. In her article, Ripley indicts society’s
insistence on woman’s “sweet religious sensibility, her gentle benevolence, her
balmy tenderness” and questions reductive definitions of woman’s destiny—“Is this
woman’s destiny? Is she to be the only adventurer, who pursues her course through
life aimless, tossed upon the waves of circumstance, intoxicated by joy, panic-struck
by misfortune, or stupidly receptive of it?” (316).
Ripley’s call for woman’s empowerment reads as a kind of reverberation of
the objectives Fuller had set for her Conversations, which aimed “to answer the
questions, - What were we born to do? and how shall we do it?” (WNC 173). Fuller’s
work indeed had a major impact on the way in which her contemporaries wrote about
“woman”—Zwarg’s monograph Feminist Conversations, for instance, is almost
entirely devoted to demonstrating how Emerson’s conversations with Fuller shaped
his views on woman. However, as Tiffany Wayne reminds us in Woman Thinking, it
is also true that the “social and intellectual history of Transcendentalism has been
limited by a focus on Margaret Fuller as the only woman of ideas associated with the
movement. Fuller usually appears as the only Transcendentalist concerned with
women’s issues, and her writing stands as the representative female and feminist
voice of Transcendentalism” (15).

86



Seldom mentioned by critics, I believe that Ripley’s article represents an
important part of the Transcendentalist conversation on women’s rights that both
engages with Emerson’s celebration of individuality and Fuller’s feminist call for
women’s education. Offering an exploration of Ripley’s feminist plea, I first examine
how her argument is articulated around the dichotomy between “woman” and “muse,”
which she debunks in favor of more realistic and fairer visions of womanhood.
Secondly, I compare Ripley’s considerations on the reality of women in society with
Fuller’s and Emerson’s statements on the matter, reflecting on the different ways in
which Transcendentalists expressed their support for women’s rights.

I – An Impending Revelation: Ripley’s Call for Women’s Recognition
A) Of Transcendentalist Activities and Gender Dynamics
Speaking up for the cause of women’s rights was a courageous act: as Fuller
observed, it was an exercise “from which women usually shrink, because, if they
express themselves on such subjects with sufficient force and cleanness to do any
good, they are exposed to assaults whose vulgarity makes them painful” (WNC 67).
After the publication of Woman, Child similarly commented that these were “subjects
which men do not wish to have discussed, and which women dare not approach”
(WNC 220). With this in mind, it is important to note that Ripley’s “Woman” not only
acted as a precursor to both Fuller’s “Great Lawsuit” and Woman, but it also
preceded the women’s movement by almost ten years. In fact, according to the
standard narrative, first-wave feminism begins with the 1848 Seneca Falls
Convention, during which Lucretia Mott, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, and many others
signed the now famous “Declaration of Sentiment.” In those days, American society’s
views on gender were based on the “Cult of True Womanhood”—an ideology which

87



confined women to the hearth by circumscribing “womanhood” to notions of selfsacrifice, passivity, and marital love. As Susan M. Cruea explains, there was an
inherent contradiction in the True Woman for while she “was assumed to be a pillar
of moral strength and virtue, she was also portrayed as delicate and weak, prone to
fainting and illness” (189). Ripley alludes to this in her article, “everywhere, we hear
the same oft-repeated things said upon them by those who have little perception of
the difficulties of the subject; and even the clergy have frequently flattered ‘the feeble
sex,’ by proclaiming to them from the pulpit what lovely things they may become, if
they will only be good, quiet, and gentle, attend exclusively to their domestic duties”
(314). In other words, women at the time were solely associated with and praised for
what related to the domestic (the maternal, the matrimonial, the ornamental); but it
was time for women to be seen as a lot more than that.
In “Her Cause Against Herself,” Adam-Max Tuchinsky notes that, in the title of
Emerson’s famous 1837 address “The American Scholar,” the adjective “American”
stands for “democracy” for it was precisely the role of a public intellectual in a
democratic society that Emerson was describing. Yet what was the role, or even the
space, allowed to women in that democracy? Not only were women denied basic
legal rights such as the right to own property, but they were also the object of social
and intellectual forms of oppression. Many areas of the public sphere were closed to
them—politics and higher education being the most emblematic of a long list. In the
first half of the nineteenth century, women still were, for instance, excluded from the
lecture stage: while present when Emerson delivered his speeches, women were
confined to other sorts of platforms that were deemed more appropriate for them,
such as “conversation.” As David Randall explains in The Concept of Conversation:
From Cicero's Sermo to the Grand Siècle's Conversation, over the years

88



conversation gradually went from being a widely respected intellectual form of
expression to being denigratingly associated with what was then referred to as
“women’s sphere.” A recent Washington Post article on “How women invented book
clubs”12 shows that traces of that are still present in today’s society, where the “book
club, dismissed as a feminine, frivolous time to drink wine and gossip is also a
radical activity: a rare place where women have long been able to engage with the
transformative power of books.” Therefore, no matter how much Fuller’s
Conversations were a success, it is important to bear in mind that it was one of the
only genres that was considered “suitable” for women. Lectures, on the other hand,
were regarded as more appropriately male and were, unsurprisingly, favoured by
Emerson and the other male members of the Transcendental Club (Thoreau, Ellery
Channing, etc.). The sense of agency that derived from lecturing was seen as
essentially “masculine” to such an extent that in “the eyes of their contemporaries,
antebellum women risked their ‘womanhood’ by becoming public speakers” (Quawas
133). Quawas points out that by “[a]ssuming the authoritative position of lecturer and
educator to adults” Fuller “was trespassing on male intellectual and professional
domains” (133).
Even though “every Transcendentalist was ready, and indeed had good
reason, to assert that there was ‘no sex in souls’” as Dall explained in her 1895
“Transcendentalism in New England” lecture (677), men and women
Transcendentalists lived very different sorts of lives depending on their sex. When, in
March 1841, Sophia and her husband George Ripley (founder of Brook Farm)

12 “How women invented book clubs, revolutionizing reading and their own lives” by

Jess McHugh, published in the Washington Post on 27 March 2021.
89



hosted the only series of Fuller’s Conversations that also involved men,13 it turned
out to be quite an unsuccessful experiment, as it served to reveal the gender
imbalance of the Transcendentalist group. Thanks to Dall’s notes on that specific
series, we know that introducing men to the Conversations made both its participants
and host suffer from the banes of unequal gender dynamics, as men started
interrupting women and dialogue became a lot less fluid than it used to be when
Fuller’s audience was limited to her female students. As Dall reported, “Margaret . . .
never enjoyed this mixed class, and considered it a failure so far as her own power
was concerned. She and Mr. Emerson met like Pyramus and Thisbe, a blank wall
between” (Margaret 13). It seems, in fact, as though men and women struggled to
adjust to this very peculiar atmosphere of inverted gender dynamics: “Emerson,”
noted Dall, “pursued his own train of thought. He seemed to forget that we had come
together to pursue Margaret’s” (Margaret 46).
Fuller’s “Great Lawsuit,” which had been written so that “[a]s men become
aware that all men have not had their fair chance, they are inclined to say that no
woman have had a fair chance” (Myerson 7), had a strong impact on male
Transcendentalists. After its publication in 1843, Emerson reported that “H. D.
Thoreau, who will never like anything” thought “‘Miss F’s is a noble piece, rich
extempore writing, talking with pen in hand’” (EL 3:183). Despite being
complimentary in tone, the expression “talking with pen in hand” in Thoreau’s
comment makes it sound condescending, for it undermines Fuller’s writing by
portraying it as more casual and improvised in nature than it should be. On the other

Dall’s notes from that specific series appear in Margaret and Her Friends: Or Ten
Conversations with Margaret Fuller upon the Mythology of the Greeks and its
Expression in Art, held at the House of the Rev. George Ripley Boston, Beginning
March 1, 1841, which was published in 1895.
13

90



hand, Emerson found “the piece very proper and noble, and itself quite an important
fact in the history of Woman: . . . It will teach us all to revise our habits of thinking on
this head” (EL 3:183). The term “habits,” to which Emerson refers here in the firstperson plural, is an allusion to that series of misconceptions about women that still
shaped men’s judgement, preventing the vast majority of them from seeing women
as equals. As Matteson pinpoints, “Emerson wrote from within a culture that firmly
associated womanhood with externality, both because perceptions of women were
too often inseparable from female sexual characteristics and because women
themselves were generally supposed to maintain a worldview fixated on outward
appearances” (34). It is precisely the set of “habits” mentioned by Emerson that
Ripley wished to uproot in her 1841 Dial article on “Woman,” in which she debunked
the concept of a “sphere of a woman” (314) and indicted its degrading and limiting
nature.
B) Woman and the Muse
Together with recognition, Ripley and other women were clearly hoping to overthrow
such limiting definitions of “womanhood” and aimed to open the eyes of both their
male and female counterparts, as shown by the numerous allusions to the notion of
“revelation” in their writings. After the publication of Woman, for instance, Caroline
Sturgis wrote to Fuller that “It makes me sad that it is necessary such an one should
be written but since it is so it cannot but do good to lift the veil as you have done –
how hard a thing to do!” (WNC 207). Four years earlier, Ripley also expressed the
wish that society’s perception of women could become more just. The metaphor of
the lifting of the veil, symbolizing an imminent revelation, is present in Ripley’s text
through the use of verbs like “penetrate” and of verb phrases like “tell the world” and
“brought to light,” as she imagines a future where “[b]lessed indeed would that man

91



be, who could penetrate the difficulties of this subject, and tell the world faithfully and
beautifully what new thing he has discovered about it, or what old truth he has
brought to light” (314). Here, the combination of the idea of “revelation” and of the
word “penetration” reminds the reader that it is gender dynamics that are at stake.
Similarly, in an article entitled “Femality” that was published in The Pathfinder in
March 1843, which Fuller quoted both in “The Great Lawsuit” and in Woman, we find
an analogous desire of wanting to return to a somewhat pre-lapsarian state of
gender equality, “the whole end of general, long-during revolution, is to restore the
rightful association, with all its accompanying harmonies and beatitudes” (Vethake
35). According to The Pathfinder article, society had somehow forgotten about “the
rightful association” of the sexes: the belief that a revelation would restore in it the
knowledge of “harmonies and beatitudes” is evocative of a kind of Platonic type of
reminiscence. Fuller was a keen reader of Plato, as she described in a letter to
Sturgis—“Plato’s thoughts have, indeed, so passed into our intellectual life that I feel
as if only returning to my native mountain air while with these philosophers and
cannot be quite enough of a disciple (FL 2:40). Unity between the sexes, as outlined
in Aristophanes’ myth in The Symposium, possibly provided Fuller with a picture of
harmony between men and women that also appealed to her when reading
“Femality.”
For Ripley, the impending “revelation” consisted in society’s overdue
acknowledgment that a woman is simply not a “muse.” Her opposition to such
idealisation is uncompromising: “the poet's lovely vision of an ethereal being,
hovering half seen above him, in his hour of occupation, . . . is not woman, she is
only the spiritualized image of that tender class of women he loves the best” (314).
Of course, everyone understood the word “muse” as referring to either a Greek

92



goddess or simply a guiding genius but, according to Ripley, some also tended to
believe that woman was—or should be—similarly ethereal. Ripley’s article therefore
warns against the danger of such an idealisation and repeatedly insists on the fact
that the ideal woman, as is the one created by artists, is not real: the poet “knows
[woman] not as she is and must be” (314). As noted by Barbara Welter,
“[w]omanhood was believed to be, in principle, a higher, nobler state than manhood,
since it was less directly related to the body and was more involved with the spirit”
(95), which was in turn used as argument to discriminate against her. It is too easy,
too cruel, Ripley explained, to set an unrealistic ideal for the whole sex and then
condemn those who don’t meet a canon that was not rooted in reality in the first
place—“if the poet could ever be unkind, we should deem him most so when he
reproves the sex . . . for its departure from this high, beatified ideal of his, to which
he loves to give the name of woman” (314). As well as condemning such attitude,
Ripley called for men to be supportive companions and for women to assert
themselves as individuals, freeing themselves from the male gaze—"Her own
individuality should be as precious to her as [man’s] love. Let her see that the best
our most sympathising friend can do for us is, to throw a genial atmosphere around
us, . . . but our path can never be another's, and we must always walk alone” (317).
This invitation to celebrate woman’s “own individuality” reads as a feminist
interpretation by Ripley of Emerson’s earlier remarks in “The American Scholar” on
“the new importance given to the single person” (CW 1:68).
In the article from The Pathfinder mentioned earlier, moralising attitudes that
simultaneously discriminate are also called out, as the author explains that “[a]t the
time of, and evidently incidental to the FALL, clothing began; and with it, as a matter
of course, moral concealment, deception, misrepresentation and falsehood” (35).

93



The author condemns the hypocrisy of those who “degrade Femality,” defined as
“significant of the whole expansive female world,” “by every possible device and
expedient; while a labored and hypocritical adoration is abundantly enacted towards
the sex” (35). It is worth noting that Fuller expressed a similar concern about male
artists in “The Great Lawsuit” where she focused on one that, together with
Emerson, she particularly admired, Dante Alighieri. She did not straightaway
condemn idealizing love between woman and man—“In Italy, the great poets wove
into their lives an ideal love which answered to the highest wants. It included those of
the intellect and the affections, for it was a love of spirit for spirit” (Myerson 404).
Fuller described how that “ideal love” that poets spoke about “was not ascetic and
superhuman, but interpreting all things” and added that the Italian poet spoke of
woman “not only as the bride of his heart, but the mother of his soul” (Myerson 404).
However, Fuller also noted that “even with such men the practice was often widely
different from the mental faith” (404) and highlighted the contrast between ideal life
and real life mentioning that “Dante, almost immediately after the death of Beatrice,
married a lady chosen for him by his friends” (Myerson 405). After the death of his
beloved in 1290, Dante had indeed married another woman called Gemma Donati
(Myerson 426n54). In his journal, Emerson once compared Fuller to Beatrice, writing
that “whilst Dante’s ‘Nuova Vita’ is almost unique in the literature of sentiment, I have
called the imperfect record [Fuller] gave me of two of her days, ‘Nuovissima Vita’”
(WNC 191). That is perhaps foreboding of the critical way in which Emerson would
later describe the presence of sentiment in Fuller’s writing in Memoirs. In a section of
Memoirs entitled “Letters,” Emerson summarised his critique of Fuller’s writing,
declaring that “[i]n short, Margaret often loses herself in sentimentalism” (280). He
added that although “[h]er integrity was perfect, and she was led and followed by

94



love, and was really bent on truth,” she was “too indulgent to the meteors of her
fancy” (MMFO 280). “Sentiment,” from Latin sentire (to feel), denotes a degree of
physicality that Fuller juxtaposed in her writing to more idealised versions of
“womanhood” (as seen in previous sections, she used the Greek goddess Minerva, a
symbol for strength, as an instrument for female empowerment); and yet that degree
of physicality, as Ripley states in her article, was often rejected in favor of often
male-produced purified visions of women.

II – Transcendentalists in Conversation: Of Social Expectations and Woman’s
Education
A) Of Contemplative Lives and Faithful Wives: Discordant Visions of
Womanhood
Even for Transcendentalists, there were expectations linked to women specifically
that differed from those related to men. In Emerson’s writings, women are indeed
often associated with poetry—as is the case in a letter he wrote to Fuller in June
1840, “A woman in every part beautiful is a practical poet, is she not? awakening
tenderness & hope & poetry in all whom she approaches” (EL 2:336). Echoes of that
can be found in Emerson’s first official address on “Woman,” written for the Second
Annual New England Woman's Rights Convention in 1855, where the association
between women and poetry is reiterated,
There is no gift of nature without some drawback. . . . More vulnerable, more
infirm, more mortal than men, they could not be such excellent artists in this
element of fancy if they did not lend and give themselves to it. They are poets
who believe their own poetry. They emit from their pores a colored atmosphere,
one would say, wave upon wave of rosy light, in which they walk evermore, and
see all objects through this warm-tinted mist that envelops them. (Sacks 160)

95



Emerson’s views on women’s rights were progressive for his time and he always
openly declared himself in favor of women’s vote; however, his remarks appear
particularly problematic when compared to the more radical stances adopted by
some of his female contemporaries, who did not only demand more rights, but who
proposed a rethinking of gender roles. After listening to Emerson’s lecture on “Being
and Seeming,” Child perceived double standards that she felt Emerson was unjustly
setting for women and men: in Letters from New-York, she recounted how he had
“urged women to be, rather than seem . . . [for] all this seeming world would not gain
hearts like being truly what God made them” (237). Child expressed her disapproval:
although the “advice was excellent, . . . the motive, by which it was urged, brought of
flush of indignation over my face” (237). She explained that while “Men were
exhorted to be, rather than to seem, that they might fulfil the sacred mission for
which their souls were embodied; . . . women were urged to simplicity and
truthfulness, that they might become more pleasing” (237). One could make a similar
point about Emerson’s definition of “women” as “poets who believe their own poetry”
in the 1855 address, in which Emerson stated that women have an inherently poetic
nature, an innate tendency to receive inspiration. That essentialist view of
womanhood is not surprising for the time; however, what is worth noting, is that
Emerson’s argument that women are “poets who believe their own poetry” equates
their artistic sensitivity to a certain type of weakness (“drawback”), which suggests
women’s vulnerability (“more infirm”) and implicitly serves to justify their inferiority to
men (“more mortal than men”). While the anaphoric repetition of the adjective
“more”—“more vulnerable, more infirm, more mortal”—reinforces the idea of
women’s supposed weakness, phrases like “emit from their pores” and “warm-tinted
mist that envelops them” hint at a certain passivity inherent in women, as if their

96



talent were something they display inadvertently. At another point in the address,
Emerson also states that “Man is the will, and Woman the sentiment" (Sacks 158).
As Len Gougeon commented in one of the first articles published on the subject, for
“Emerson, the power of sentiment is not insignificant. In fact, it is an expression of
mankind’s intuitive strength and divinity,” which for women “expresses itself in
marriage, art, and education, and through those activities, women play a
fundamental part in shaping society (580-581). Unfortunately, as Gougeon
suggested, “It is this sensitivity that Emerson fears will be compromised if women
pursue a more public role” (580-581). Such were the barriers that stood between
women and equality in antebellum America for, even within the most progressive
circles, men were still reluctant to grant the opposite sex all the rights afforded to
male citizens.
In response to this kind of problematic reverence, Ripley stated that there was
nothing ideal in the vision of woman as aloof from everything. In a swift rhetorical
move, she attempted to redefine the concept of “ideal woman” herself and described
her as someone who is totally immersed in culture,
Thought should be her atmosphere; books her food; friends her occasional
solace. Prosperity will not dazzle her, for her own spirit is always brighter than
its sunshine, and if the deepest sorrow visits her, it will only come to lift her to a
higher region, where, with all of life far beneath her, she may sit regally apart till
the end. Is this the ideal of a perfect woman, and if so, how does it differ from a
perfect man? (366)
Over and over, Ripley debunked the vision of woman as someone who lives a purely
“contemplative life,” reminding her readers that women do, in fact, work: she openly
critiqued the invisibilisation of women’s domestic labour, pinpointing “that in the spot

97



where man throws aside his heavy responsibilities, his couch of rest is often
prepared by his faithful wife, at the sacrifice of all her quiet contemplation and
leisure” (315). As Wayne remarks, domestic labour took a toll on “individual thinkers”
like Ripley and Fuller, “But, unlike the majority of their peers, all eventually found
themselves in circumstances that either allowed them some freedom to pursue
writing and lecturing or, in fact, financially compelled them to pursue such activities in
order to support their families” (Wayne 76). In Ripley’s article, the point made about
women’s work is combined with a plea in favor of woman’s contemplative life. On the
one hand, Ripley deplores that “if there is a being exposed to turmoil and indurating
care, it is woman, in the retirement of her own home” for her “life is usually bustle
and hurry, or barren order, dreary decorum and method, without vitality” (316). On
the other hand, she argues that woman “should be seen . . . calmly contemplating
beauty in all its forms, studying the harmony of life, as well as of outward nature,
deciding nothing, learning all things, gradually forming her own ideal” (317). Ripley
hoped that women would be able to benefit from contemplative life as much as men
did and in that way she also indicted the false belief that a life of domesticity equalled
a life of intellectual satisfaction. Her reference to Emerson’s writings on
contemplative life is implicit; while in “The American Scholar,” Emerson stated that
“Action is within the scholar subordinate” (1:94), he added in 1850 that “If I were to
compare action of a much higher strain with a life of contemplation, I should not
venture to pronounce with much confidence in favour of the former. Mankind have
such a deep stake in inward illumination” (CW 4:266). While Emerson deemed it less
satisfactory, he nonetheless viewed the domestic sphere as belonging to both men
and women—Eckel explains that by “exploding the idea of ‘home’ in his early lecture
on ‘Home,’ Emerson reframes the domestic sphere as a shared habitation for men

98



and women in their pursuit of a ‘deeper Home’ that sheltered both physical selves
and spiritual principles” (191). Interestingly, the corollary to that finding according to
Eckel is that “[o]nce the home is endowed with global significance, mere housework
becomes drudgery for women as well as for men – a point Emerson underscores in
a chapter on ‘Domestic Life’” (191).
B) A Transcendentalist Call for Women’s Rights: Ripley on Education and SelfAssertion
Commenting on domestic life, Ripley suggests the oppressive conviction that woman
only exists as “a faithful wife” had somehow entered the mind of women themselves,
as a sort of self-confidence crisis: she acknowledges this by stating that “[v]ery few
of her sex suspect even how noble and beautiful is that which they legitimately
occupy, for they are early deprived of the privilege of seeing things as they are”
(315). In a letter to Fuller written in July 1839, Emerson made a similar observation
and remarked, “Is it not wonderful what inspirations women have. . . . If they would
only hold themselves at their own price, if they would not subdue their sentiments,
the age of heroes would come at once!” (EL 2:210-211). In both Ripley’s and
Emerson’s depictions, women appear as lacking the confidence to believe in their
own powers and as unaware of their capabilities, a clear consequence of gender
discrimination.
With woman deprived of fundamental rights, Ripley deploringly declared that
in “our present state of society woman possesses not; she is under possession”
(315). In her plea, Ripley explained how a proper education would put an end to this
state of numbness in which woman found herself silent and confined, for Ripley
knew that while “[h]is wish is law, hers only the unavailing sigh uttered in secret”
(316). The use of the word “law” indicates that what was happening within the walls

99



of the home was also reflected at state-level, in a democracy which still did not
recognise woman as a complete, dignified entity. Ripley’s lucidity with regards to the
dynamics of gender oppression is astounding—“In the common course of events she
[woman] is selected as the life-companion of some one of the other sex; because
selected, she fixes her affections upon him, and hardly ventures to exercise upon
him even her powers of observation” (364). Her powerful indictment makes clear that
without the ability to reflect critically, which she would develop through a proper
education, woman would never be free. Through a series of vigorous rhetorical
questions, Ripley asks “Why is she not encouraged to think and penetrate through
externals to principles?” (317). Her exhortation to educate women comes with a kind
reassurance to those who fear such a drastic change: “The faults of those she loves
should never be veiled by her affection, but placed in their true relation to character,
by the deep insight with which she penetrates beneath them. With high heroic
courage, she should measure the strength” (317). Ripley and fellow
Transcendentalists—female and male—understood very well that it was fundamental
that women were granted the right to education: the fact that the verb “penetrate” is
repeated four times in Ripley’s article epitomises her belief in the pivotal importance
of education in the fight against gender discrimination. In Woman, Fuller was indeed
uncompromising about the fact that “it should be acknowledged that [women] have
intellect which needs developing; that they should not be considered completed if
being of affection and habit alone” (56). When the idea of a series of conversations
came to her, Fuller similarly outlined the need “[t]o systemize thought and give a
precision in which our sex are so deficient, chiefly, I think because they have so few
inducements to test and classify what they receive” (WNC 173). She knew how
important it was to allow women to develop critical thinking and to compensate for a

100



purposeful, societal lack of institutions that would do the same: with her
Conversations, Fuller aimed indeed at “supplying a point of union to well-educated
and thinking women in a city which, with great pretensions to mental refinement,
boasts at present nothing of the kind” (WNC 86).
Aware of the privilege of having received an education, Ripley, Fuller, and
other women continued to extend that opportunity to those who weren’t as lucky. In
1844, one year after “The Great Lawsuit” appeared in the Dial, Fuller visited the
women prisoners of Sing Sing. The experience left a strong (positive) mark on Fuller,
and she compared meeting these women with her discussions for women in Boston:
“They were among the so called worst, but nothing could be more decorous than
their conduct, and frank too. All passed much as in one of my Boston Classes” (FL
3:237). In the same letter, written to Elizabeth Hoar in October 1844, Fuller
acknowledged that her “path had been a favored one” compared to the majority of
women of that time. With regards to the standard of women’s education in the first
half of the nineteenth century, Fuller represented in fact an exception: her father
Timothy had brought her up in a way that was most often reserved only for boys—by
the age of ten, Fuller could read in several European languages. As she would later
describe in her “Autobiographical Romance,” Fuller’s upbringing was as rigorous as
it was exhausting for a young child. Similarly, Ripley was a rare example of a highly
educated woman; she was, however, also denied a college education, unlike her
husband who was in his final year at Harvard Divinity School when they first met.
Fuller’s—and Ripley’s—commitment to women’s education was utterly democratic in
that it went beyond class and aimed to fight discrimination of gender, race, or
poverty. A month after her visit, Fuller wrote directly to the women inmates of Sing
Sing and asserted, once again, the redemptive quality of culture,

101



I hope you will accept these books as a token that, though on returning to the
world you may have much to encounter from the prejudices of the unthinking,
yet there are many who will be glad to encourage you to begin a new career,
and redeem the past by living lives of wise and innocent acts, useful to your
fellow-creatures and fit for being gifted with immortal souls. (WNC 205)
Wishing these women well, Fuller insisted on the power of education which she
hoped would give them the strength and confidence to face “the prejudices of the
unthinking” when re-entering society.

The work of women Transcendentalists like Ripley and Fuller should be
regarded as acts of social reformism, for they attempted to create a space for
women which did not exist before. While Fuller’s Conversations encouraged women
to rethink their role in society by countering the common belief that women were
mere “ornaments” (Simmons 217), Ripley’s article on “Woman” insisted on the
pivotal role of education and urged readers to view women as intellectual beings. Not
only do the works of Transcendentalist women appear to have been in conversation
with one another, but the circular exchange also impacted the wider
Transcendentalist community. Published in January 1841, Ripley’s article preceded
just by a few months the creation of the famous Utopian, Transcendentalist
community Brook Farm. As Sterling Delano explains, Brook Farm women enjoyed
freedom from the prevailing social and religious expectations that defined the “Cult of
True Womanhood” in antebellum America. And just as Ripley’s ideas shaped that
experiment, Brook Farm in turn influenced Fuller, who visited the West Roxbury

102



community in October 1842, months before “The Great Lawsuit” was published in
the Dial.14
In the longer term, by calling out society’s discriminatory practices and
asserting the need for a fair rebalancing of the polis, writings like Fuller’s and
Ripley’s inspired women for decades to fight for their rights. Fuller confuted the
prevailing claim that woman was inferior to man, she revolted against the fact that
women should find themselves in a state of forced ignorance and subsequent
inferiority, and touched upon the notion that gender might be more socially construed
than people liked to think. Fuller became a major reference for second-wave
feminists and the mark of Fuller’s theories on the history of feminism can be traced
up to Judith Butler’s gender performativity and beyond. I hope to have provided
supporting evidence that will allow us to add Sophia Ripley to the list of precursors to
the first American women’s movement, and to later moments of feminist history.

14

In An American Romantic Life (pp. 63-64), Capper shows that Fuller had quite an
ambivalent relationship with Brook Farm and the Ripleys. After briefly considering
moving to Brook Farm with her mother at the onset of the project, Fuller abandoned
the idea and only occasionally visited the community through the years.
103



Conclusion
Emerson’s views on womanhood are ambiguous and his stance on the matter
remains a point of critical contention today. On the one hand, as Cole remarks,
“Wives in his estimation were apparently so embedded in the lives of others as to
have no ‘genius & cultivation,’ and he said no more of them” (“Conversing” 157).
Looking into Emerson’s personal connections, Cole also states that “[b]enevolent
Lidian was excluded from the start in his highest ranks of the spirit” (“Conversing”
157). On the other hand, Gilbert defends Emerson’s feminist credentials by noting
that he condemned “poets [who] promoted a stereotyped and generic view of
woman,” for they were “like the ‘misogynist’ he had met who ‘looked on every woman
as an imposter’” (EJ 11:455) and “because real women did not resemble these bland
and homogenized stereotypes” (215).
The way in which Emerson portrayed Fuller in Memoirs is no less ambiguous.
In Chapter One, I based my investigation on a series of distinctions: I examined how
Emerson, Fuller, and other members of the Transcendentalist circle looked at
womanhood by distinguishing between “ideal womanhood” and “real womanhood.” I
compared Emerson’s vision of women as “queens” with Fuller’s recourse to the
world of Ideas, which she moved beyond by utilizing it as means for female
empowerment, and I also examined Ripley’s take on “Woman” by analysing her
eponymous Dial article, in which she resolved the woman-muse dichotomy by
redefining (and glorifying) the reality of women’s lives.
In Chapter Two, I aim to look more closely at the significance of Emerson’s
editorial choices in Memoirs: comparing his approach with the ones adopted by his
two co-authors, but also analysing the aspects of Fuller’s life that he purposely

104



ignored and/or criticised, I further reflect on what Emerson’s depiction of Fuller in
Memoirs can tell us about his real stance on the woman question.

105



Chapter Two – Rewriting the Life of an “Ultra Radical”

Introduction – The Problem of Privacy
Either used as a source of biographical information on Fuller, or dismissed for the
biased nature of its portrayals, Memoirs is rarely considered for what it actually is—a
literary work. Seldom commented on, there is, for instance, an important metaliterary
dimension to the biography, in which its authors discuss the book’s conception as
well as the difficulties they encountered while writing it. Emerson, Channing, and
Clarke all mention feeling a sense of uneasiness, akin to imposture, while dealing
with Fuller’s letters and journals for the completion of Memoirs. Confronted with the
issue of privacy, they all seem to doubt whether anyone should be reading those
texts and, also, how such private writings could ever be made so public.
At the very onset of the biographical project, in 1850, Emerson wrote to Sam
Ward: “yesterday, hints from Ellery, that the Journals contain so many allusions to
people that they can hardly be seen, or perhaps by one only, meaning me” (EL
4:228). Emerson knew that whoever was going to be editing such work would face
great challenges and suggested that only one person should read Fuller’s intimate
writings so as to preserve her privacy:
whoever is editor, it will not be quite plain what he is to take & what he is to
leave of these manifold threads, some pale coloured, & some glowing. The
personalities are essential; - leave them out & you leave out Margaret. It would
be prudentest for all parties to abdicate any part in the matter, - all but the
editor, - & make up their hearts to take their fate from his discretion. But when
he has finished his task, I think he must bring it to our jury to decide whether it
shall go to the press, or to the flames. (EL 4:231)

106



The solution which the authors of Memoirs eventually found in order to deal with
such “coloured” and “glowing” writing is that people’s names were erased.
Unfortunately, that was not the only thing that was erased from Fuller’s texts; as I go
on to demonstrate in this chapter, a great deal of censorship took place in the name
of “discretion.”
In the opening pages of “Jamaica Plain,” Channing’s first chapter in Memoirs,
he addresses the problem of privacy and, speaking directly to the reader, he writes:
“I have no hope of conveying to readers my sense of the beauty of our relation, as it
lies in the past with brightness falling on it from Margaret’s risen spirit. . . . And much
of her inner life, as confidentially disclosed, could not be represented without
betraying a secret trust” (2:9). For Channing, remaining loyal to his friend meant that
he would not reveal what was “confidentially disclosed.” It is hard to determine what
Channing considered to be “confidential,” for the word can both refer to something
that is marked by intimacy (of no particular interest, but secret to the person whom it
concerns) or something that, if revealed, could be prejudicial to either the person
who said it or to other people. Channing summarised his approach to readers stating
that “all that can be done is to open the outer courts, and give a clue for loving hearts
to follow” (MMFO 2:9). Yet this type of admission to cuts and withholdings is what
damaged the credibility of Memoirs in the first place amongst critics and scholars.
Clarke also wrote about his loyalty to Fuller in his chapter “Life in Cambridge,”
yet he did so differently from Channing. Clarke decided that it was fair to break the
silence now that Fuller was no longer alive: referring to a specific text, he explained:
“In a postscript she adds, ‘No other cousin or friend of any style is to see this note’.
So for twenty years it has lain unseen . . . . And now that noble heart sleeps beneath
the tossing Atlantic, and I feel no reluctance in showing to the world this expression

107



of pure youthful ardour” (MMFO 1:68). Clarke felt “no reluctance” in showing what
Fuller had asked him to keep private: he believed that by revealing something that
Fuller wanted to keep secret he might actually contribute positively to her
posthumous reputation, for “It may, perhaps, lead some wise worldlings, who doubt
the possibility of such a relation, to reconsider the grounds of their skepticism”
(MMFO 1:68). This shows that Clarke was aware that Fuller’s persona might have
been misunderstood by some of her contemporaries and he took an active step into
trying to safeguard her image after she passed away. Clarke also struggled with the
notion of privacy, in that he believed that revealing all about his friendship with Fuller
would mean to also lay himself bare: “The difficulty which we all feel in describing our
past intercourse and friendship with Margaret Fuller, is that the intercourse was so
intimate, and the friendship, so personal, that it is like making a confession to the
public of our most interior selves,” “To print one of her letters is like giving an extract
from our own private journal” (MMFO 1:61). Yet Clarke somehow decided to sacrifice
himself in the name of his friendship with Fuller and recognised that “it seems due to
this great soul that those of us who have been blessed and benefitted by her
friendship should be willing to say what she had done for us, - undeterred by the
thought that to reveal her is to expose ourselves” (MMFO 1:61).
As shown by these various examples, the value of Memoirs of Margaret Fuller
Ossoli does not exclusively lie in its more or less exhaustive exegesis of Fuller’s life,
yet the biography also bears enormous potential for what it can tell us about its
writers—all key figures of American Transcendentalism. Overlooked and
disregarded, Memoirs provides a unique and exceptional insight into the lives of its
authors and into their relationship with Fuller. More specifically, it is fascinating to
examine what they chose to say about it, and how they proceeded to do it. In this

108



chapter’s first section, entitled “‘An Essential Line of American History’: Memoirs and
its Authors,” I look at the way in which Emerson, Clarke, and Channing related their
first encounter with Fuller as well as how they chose to confront the issue of Fuller’s
mysterious union with Ossoli. In the second section of Chapter Two, I examine
Fuller’s unpublished journal fragments from 1844 (Fruitlands Museum) in order to
further highlight and reflect on Emerson’s omissions and editorial choices. And,
thirdly, in “‘Woman, or Artist?’: Emerson and the Fuller Dilemma in Memoirs of
Margaret Fuller Ossoli,” I look at the way in which Emerson’s editorial choices reflect
his struggle to reconcile himself with Fuller’s nonconformism.

109



2.1 “An Essential Line of American History”: Memoirs and Its
Authors
Although Emerson ended up taking on the role of editor, the idea to “write some Life
of Margaret” originally stemmed from Channing, who first thought of “calling it
‘Margaret and Her Friends’” (EL 4:222). Greeley, too, wrote to Emerson in August
1850, urging him to work on “a proper edition of Margaret’s works” (EL 4:225).
Greeley seemed quite adamant that Emerson was the only person who should write
a biography of Fuller, and he suggested that Emerson should do so almost out of a
sense of moral duty—“all say you ought to write that – must write that” (EL 4:225).
Moreover, Greeley doubted that Channing could be a suitable author/editor for such
project, “If Henry Channing will write another, very good; but he is apt to be irresolute
and dilatory; and besides, if he would write his memoirs would not injure yours, and
scarcely render it less necessary” (EL 4:225). He therefore implored Emerson, “Will
you write a Memoir? And will you do any and every thing else in the premises?” (EL
4:225). Richard Frederic Fuller, Margaret’s brother, also reached out to Emerson and
“said he considered [him] Margaret’s spiritual representative” (EL 4:227).
After receiving “an invitation from Channing to a conference with him on the
subject of a memoir of Margaret” (EL 4:225), Emerson began to gather manuscripts
on Fuller in August 1850. Initially, it looked like Emerson and Channing were going to
work with Samuel Gray Ward—as shown by a note to Richard Fuller written by
Emerson on September 1st, “When Ward, Channing, & I have decided on the part we
will take, I shall know whether to use or to restore the trust” (EL 4:227). What’s more,
Emerson asked Ward to be the editor of the biography: “Perhaps one person should
undertake the whole work, & everything should be put unreservedly in his hands. If

110



you could, & would, you should be that person” (EL 4:231). But in 1851, Emerson
was the editor and Sam Ward’s role had been taken over by James Freeman Clarke:
in fact, Ward’s name does not even appear in the “Table of Contents” of Memoirs,
despite the fact that his early contributions are thought to have been included in the
biography (EL 4:255n52).
From the very beginning, Emerson was well aware that writing a “Life of
Margaret” (EL 4:222) would be challenging. He had “[m]any questions” about the
feasibility of such work: indeed, he wondered “whether the materials will be
surrendered, on all hands? Whether it can be done by one? Whether it is publishable
if done?” (EL 4:222). Just like Channing and Clarke, Emerson also addressed those
challenges in the Memoirs themselves: “Of the friends who surrounded her, at that
period, it is neither easy to speak, nor not to speak. A life of Margaret is impossible
without them, she mixed herself so inextricably with her company” (MMFO 1:205).
In August 1850, when Emerson began his work on Memoirs, there was a real
effort on his behalf to collect all of her writings: he tried to contact as many friends as
possible and asked for anything that could be useful—letters, journals written by
Margaret—to be sent to him. Of this, Emerson kept track of in a notebook entitled
“Margaret Fuller Ossoli,” later transcribed in volume 11 of The Journals and
Miscellaneous Notebooks of Ralph Waldo Emerson, in which he collected passages
written by Fuller as well as writings by her friends and family, framing some of these
quotations with his own biographical commentary.15 In the notebook, Emerson
outlined a preliminary “Table of Contents,” which bears strong resemblances to its
definitive version in Memoirs:

15 See Chapter Three, section 3.1, for my analysis of Emerson’s notebook.

111



(EJ 11:462)
Whereas volume 1’s chapters are identical to the published version, chapters in
volume 2 differ slightly: chapter VII on “Highlands” was included in the 1852 version
as part of “VII - New York (Journals and Letters & C.)” and instead of “X - Wreck,”
Memoirs’ last chapter is more subtly entitled “Homeward.” What’s more, the number
of pages ended up being redistributed differently to how Emerson had initially
imagined: “Youth,” a chapter made of Fuller’s autobiographical writings, was
diminished by half its size and ended up consisting of 40 pages in the final version
instead of 80 pages as in Emerson’s original plans; the same happened to “New
York,” which went from the anticipated 100 pages to 51 in the published version. The
final version of the “Table of Contents” of Memoirs both consists of chapters written
by one specific author—“Cambridge” is attributed to Clarke, “Concord” and “Boston”
to Emerson, and “Jamaica Plain” to Channing—and of collections of Fuller’s writings
such as chapter “VIII - Europe, Letters.”
In the first part of this section, I focus on the first pages of Clarke’s,
Emerson’s, and Channing’s chapters in Memoirs (respectively, “Cambridge,”
“Concord,” and “Jamaica Plain”) as I analyse the rhetorical devices that all three
employed to try to protect Fuller’s reputation. In part two, I concentrate on a matter

112



which was tightly linked to Fuller’s reputation, i.e. her marriage, and examine how
the authors dealt with such a delicate issue.

I – Uneasy Beginnings and Textual Confessions: Emerson, Clarke and
Channing on First Meeting Fuller

A) Justifying Fuller: Of Bad Impressions and Friendly Justifications
Emerson’s, Channing’s, and Clarke’s chapters all begin in a rather similar way:
almost symmetrically, after briefly recollecting their first meeting with Fuller, the three
authors praise her but also mention that she tended to leave quite bad first
impressions on people. James Freeman Clarke was the first to meet Fuller: as he
recounts, his “acquaintance with Sarah Margaret Fuller began in 1829. We both lived
in Cambridge, and from that time until she went to Groton to reside, in 1833, I saw
her, or heard from her, almost every day” (MMFO 1:62). He explains that the two
were actually related—“There was a family connexion, and we called each other
cousin,” “I had once before seen Margaret, when we were both children about five
years of age” (MMFO 1:62). Critics have commented on that connection, suggesting
that Clarke might only have brough it up to quell any doubts of a romantic
involvement with Fuller. Whether that truly motivated his comments or not, Fuller
actually did the opposite while writing to her “cousin”: she minimized their kinship by
signing, ironically, ‘Your cousin only thirty-seven degrees removed, M.’” (MMFO
1:63).
Clarke described his first adult encounter with Fuller very positively, as shown
by the enumeration “What fire, what exuberance, what reach, grasp, overflow of
thought, shone in her conversation!” (MMFO 1:62). He saw Fuller as a friend who
could elevate him spiritually—his appraisal is indeed pervaded with references to
“elevation” such as “a friendship which brought light to my mind, which enlarged my

113



heart, and gave elevation and energy to my aims and purposes,” “we never met
without my feeling that she was ready. . . . to demand of me, always, the best that I
could be or do” (64), “She accepted me for this friend, and to me it was a gift of the
gods, an influence like no other” (MMFO 1:62). Metaphorical expressions such as
“gift of the gods”—“gods”, who are up high in the sky—and words like “influence”
(etymologically related to the verb “to boil), all partake of an image of Fuller as a
spiritually elevating presence, similarly to Emerson’s likening her to a “queen” as
seen in Chapter One. However positive Fuller’s influence was in his eyes, Clarke
also acknowledged that not everybody shared his impression of Margaret—“at the
time of which I write, she seemed, and was to the multitude, a haughty and
supercilious person, - while to those whom she loved, she was all the more gentle,
tender and true” (MMFO 1:65).
Emerson’s chapter “Concord” similarly insists on the negative impression that
Fuller made on people—“It is to be said, that Margaret made a disagreeable first
impression on most persons, including those who became afterwards her best
friends, to such an extreme that they did not wish to be in the same room with her”
(MMFO 1:202). Emerson and Fuller met for the first time on July 22 nd, 1836—“It was
not, however, till the next July that her first visit to our house was arranged, and she
came to spend a fortnight with my wife” (MMFO 1:201-202). About that encounter,
Emerson relates how he first thought Fuller was rather unpleasant, noting that “her
appearance had nothing prepossessing. Her extreme plainness, - a trick of
incessantly opening and shutting her eyelids, - the nasal tone of her voice, - all
repelled; and I said to myself, we shall never get far” (MMFO 1:202). However,
Emerson also gives the reasons behind his harsh judgment: “she made me laugh
more than I liked,” “for I was, at that time, an eager scholar of ethics, and had tasted

114



the sweets of solitude and stoicism, and I found something profane in the hours of
amusing gossip into which she drew me” (MMFO 1:202). Emerson’s explanation
suggests Fuller had somehow made him feel uncomfortable, and that is the reason
why he did not like her at first. However, that also strikes a more positive light on
Emerson’s first negative impressions, suggesting that it was because of his
“resistances” to her character that he initially struggled to get on with her. Emerson
indeed quickly changed his mind: as he recounts in Memoirs, “She had an incredible
variety of anecdotes, and the readiest wit to give an absurd turn to whatever passed;
and the eyes which were so plain at first, soon swam with fun and drolleries, and the
very tides of joy and superabundant life” (1:203).
Channing’s chapter “Jamaica Plain” also opens on an account of how he
initially misunderstood Fuller: he admits that, “it must candidly be confessed, that I
then suspected her of affecting the part of a Yankee Corinna” (MMFO 2:7). Corinne,
Madame de Staël’s fictional and eponymous character,16 was the Romantic female
artist par excellence. Channing initially thought that Fuller “seemed to walk
enveloped in a shiny fog of sentimentalism” (7), yet he quickly changed his mind and
realised that, “conscious as she was of an unfulfilled destiny, and of an undeveloped
being, Margaret was no pining sentimentalist” (MMFO 2:39). Channing and Fuller
first met in 1839, “It was while Margaret was residing at Jamaica Plain, in the
summer of 1839, that we first really met as friends” (5), “till the summer of 1839,
when, as has been already said, the friendship, long before rooted, grew up and
leafed and bloomed” (MMFO 2:9). Once he “caught a glimpse of her real self” (7),
Channing realised that Fuller “was, indeed, The Friend” (MMFO 2:40). Although he
quickly became Fuller’s great admirer, Channing also remained aware throughout

16 Corinne, or Italy was published in 1807.

115



the years that her character might still be misjudged by others. He justified her
apparent faults in a compelling passage:
Her stately deportment, border though it might on arrogance, but expressed
high-heartedness. Her independence, even if haughty and rash, was the
natural action of a self-centred will, that waited only fit occasion to prove itself
heroic. Her earnestness to read the hidden history of others was the gauge of
her own emotion. The enthusiasm that made her speech so affluent, when
measured by the average scale, was the unconscious overflow of a poetic
temperament. And the ardour of her friends’ affection proved the faithfulness of
her love. (MMFO 2:114)
The structure of Channing’s sentences repeats itself over and over: the use of
adverbs of concession suggests that Fuller’s character was simply misjudged by
those who did not like her, while contrasting traits—placed at the beginning and at
the end of each sentence and separated by mirror-effect commas—reflect the
complexity of Fuller’s temperament (“arrogance” and “high-heartedness,” “haughty”
and “heroic,” “average” and “poetic”).
B) A Matter of Reputation: Of Bad Rumours and Gender Boundaries
The notion of “reputation” pervades Emerson’s and Channing’s accounts of their first
meeting with Fuller. Channing first heard of Fuller years before he actually met her in
person, and his acquaintance was initially mediated: “It was through the medium of
others, however, that at this time I best learned to appreciate Margaret’s nobleness
of nature and principle” (MMFO 2:8). James Freeman Clarke was Channing’s and
Fuller’s common friend and it is through his eyes that Channing first started to know
Fuller, “My most intimate friend in the Theological School, James Freeman Clarke,
was her constant companion in exploring the rich gardens of German literature; and

116



from his descriptions I formed a vivid image of her industry, comprehensiveness,
buoyancy, patience and came to honour her intelligent interest in high problems”
(MMFO 2:8). Clarke’s praises fostered Channing’s curiosity: he related how his
“curiosity was piqued as to this entertaining personage, I never sought an
introduction, but, on the contrary, rather shunned encounter with one so armed from
head to foot in saucy sprightliness,” for many were talking about Fuller’s talents,
“though young, she was already noted for conversational gifts, and the rare skill of
attracting to her society, not spirited collegians only, but men mature in culture and of
established reputation” (MMFO 2:6).
Many of the things that Channing had heard about Fuller before he met her
had to do with the notion of gender: first of all, Fuller “was considered a prodigy of
talent and accomplishment; but a sad feeling prevailed, that she had been
overtasked by her father, who wished to train her like a boy” (MMFO 2:5). Because
of the way in which Timothy Fuller chose to conduct the education of his daughter,
Fuller’s upbringing was very different from that normally reserved to girls in the first
half of the nineteenth century. It is as if Fuller had crossed, since a very young age,
the gender boundaries that were commonly accepted and therefore “her vivacity,
decisive tone, downrightness and contempt of conventional standards, continued to
repel” (MMFO 2:6). Fuller’s personality and character were not recognised as
feminine, and that might be why “[s]he appeared too intense in expression, action,
emphasis, to be pleasing” (MMFO 2:6).
Emerson’s account resembles that of Channing in that he also heard of Fuller
before actually meeting her—“I became acquainted with Margaret in 1835. Perhaps
it was a year earlier that Henry Hedge, who had long been her friend, told me of her
genius and studies, and loaned me her manuscript translation of Goethe’s Tasso”

117



(MMFO 1:201). Yet Emerson’s account also translates a certain uneasiness
regarding Fuller’s personality: Emerson mentions Fuller’s negative reputation, and
links it unequivocally to her gender: “She had a dangerous reputation for satire, in
addition to her great scholarship. The men thought she carried too many guns, and
the women did not like one who despised them” (MMFO 1:202). Fuller never
conformed to the limited definition of what a woman should be in antebellum
America, and that attracted all sorts of unfair criticism: as reported by Emerson, the
“rumor was much spread abroad, that she was sneering, scoffing, critical, disdainful
of humble people, and of all but the intellectual. I had heard it whenever she was
named. It was a superficial judgement” (MMFO 1:203).
It is in order to protect her from such smearing comments that Emerson,
Channing, and Clarke wrote Memoirs of Margaret Fuller Ossoli. Aware that Fuller
could leave very bad first impressions on people, the authors of Memoirs filled their
work with justifications of why Fuller should not be misunderstood. Inextricably linked
to Fuller’s reputation, the question of Fuller’s marriage, on which I will focus next,
shows just how keen they were to protect it.

II – William Henry Channing’s Editing of Emelyn Story’s Notebook: “The
Private Marriage” in Memoirs of Margaret Fuller Ossoli
As recorded in Emerson’s journal, he and Channing talked about the probability of
Fuller’s marriage—“W.H.C. fancied that M. had not married: that a legal tie was
contrary to her view of a noble life. I, on the contrary, believed that . . . she would feel
that this was a tie which ought to have every solemnest sanction” (EJ 11:463). Yet,
when confronted with these questions, the editors of Memoirs chose to safeguard
Fuller’s reputation and, in 1852, they countered all possible doubts about her

118



marriage by including the name of Ossoli in the title of their work. What’s more, a full
section of Chapter VIII, “Europe,” was devoted to Fuller’s “Private Marriage.”
The thirteen-page long section entitled “The Private Marriage” was entirely
drawn from a text written after Fuller’s death by Emelyn Story, her “closest
confidante in Rome” (Marshall 292), to which Channing later added annotations and
corrections. The heavy marks of his editing are still visible in Emelyn Story’s fortypage long notebook, which has now been digitized by the Boston Public Library. In
fact, a “portion of the manuscripts in Channing’s possession was later given to
Higginson for his biography. He, in turn, left most of them to the Boston Public
Library,” as indicated by Robert Hudspeth (1:63). In Margaret Fuller Ossoli,
Higginson commented upon the cuts made by the editors of Memoirs to Story’s text:
“If I vary somewhat from this account, as heretofore printed, it is because Mrs.
Story’s original letter lies before me; and I have attached importance to certain
passages which were omitted, perhaps for want of space or reasons of literary
convenience, in the ‘Memoirs’” (238-239). Story’s notebook is only one of the many
examples of how original sources were tampered with in order to suit the image of
Fuller that the authors wanted to promote.
Having relied on them for his edition of The Letters of Margaret Fuller,
Hudspeth drew some damning conclusions about the condition of Fuller’s manuscript
letters: he particularly deplored Channing’s editing methods, for his “section of the
Memoirs is a briar patch. People are misidentified; separate letters are silently joined
together; letters are joined to Tribune essays; and Fuller’s language is often
drastically changed” (1:62). Responsible for the last section of Memoirs, “Channing
created the most serious problems for his readers. He had the troublesome last half

119



decade of Fuller’s life to cover, and he seems to have been most willfully capricious
in handling the manuscripts” (FL 1:62).
Thanks to the fact that Emelyn Story’s manuscript notebook is still intact, the
comparison between the original text and Memoirs’ version of it in “The Private
Marriage” gives us a unique chance to take a closer look at Channing’s editing
methods and to comment upon the nature of his choices. As has been previously
established, Fuller’s marriage was a difficult question to tackle: first of all, there was
little information available and, second of all, a large part of Fuller’s reputation
depended on it. Hudspeth remarks how “[f]rom the start there were obvious
problems, the most conspicuous of which was the secrecy surrounding Fuller’s
marriage and the timing of Angelo’s birth. Each of the editors was expected to help
clarify this ambiguous and embarrassing situation” (1:60). What’s more, “the mid
nineteenth-century did not share our insistence on the sanctity of texts. For them,
private writing was just that: private” (FL 1:61): therefore, Channing did not hesitate
to alter—and damage—the original text when needed. The following analysis of
Channing’s annotations on Story’s text reveals the degree to which his changes
impacted the reception of the final version of the story in Memoirs.
A) Of Innocent Annotations and Invasive Corrections
The editing notes that appear on Emelyn Story’s manuscript text were made both
with ink and with pencil. Due to their coherence throughout the text and to the
resemblance of the handwriting, we can assume that they were made by the same
hand. Furthermore, we can also assume that they were made by Channing because
of the following signature next to one of the notes, “W.H.C.” (see figure 2):

120



(Fig. 2) “W.H.C.” Story, Emelyn. Mrs. Emelyn (Eldredge) Story Autograph Manuscript. Rare Books
Department, Boston Public Library, Massachusetts.

Channing’s more or less invasive annotations were clearly designed to be
read by a printer: one can see their direct application in the Memoirs. Some of his
annotations are strictly technical: for example, Channing indicated when to begin a
new paragraph (see figure 3) and wrote “connect” when he wanted to connect two
paragraphs from Story’s original version (see figure 4). Fortunately, this type of
annotation does not particularly hinder our reading of the original text.

(Fig. 3) “¶” Story, Emelyn. Mrs. Emelyn (Eldredge) Story Autograph Manuscript. Rare Books
Department, Boston Public Library, Massachusetts.

(Fig. 4) “(connect)” Story, Emelyn. Mrs. Emelyn (Eldredge) Story Autograph Manuscript. Rare Books
Department, Boston Public Library, Massachusetts.

However, Channing’s syntax and punctuation corrections are much more invasive.
Those were also made both with pencil and ink, yet they often covered the word they

121



were attempting to rectify, preventing us from being able to read what had originally
been written underneath. As shown by figures 5 and 6, Channing corrected Story’s
writing—as is the case for “though” instead of “but” (see figure 6)—without
necessarily altering the meaning of the sentence, but simply by improving its syntax.

(Fig. 5) Story, Emelyn. Mrs. Emelyn (Eldredge) Story Autograph Manuscript. Rare Books Department,
Boston Public Library, Massachusetts.

(Fig. 6) “though.” Story, Emelyn. Mrs. Emelyn (Eldredge) Story Autograph Manuscript. Rare Books
Department, Boston Public Library, Massachusetts.

B) Of Substitutions and Subterfuges: Explicit Omissions and Suspicious
Additions
One of the bluntest examples of Channing’s editing lies in a short passage—most
likely written by him —that he scissored and glued on top of Story’s original
manuscript. Fortunately, the material used to stick the blue piece of paper (see
figures 7 and 8) on top of the original manuscript (see figure 9) did not ruin what lied
underneath it. We can therefore compare the two passages and hypothesize on why
Channing felt the need to replace the original text with a different one.

122



(Fig. 7) “The blue piece of paper (front).” Story, Emelyn. Mrs. Emelyn (Eldredge) Story Autograph
Manuscript. Rare Books Department, Boston Public Library, Massachusetts.

(Fig. 8) “The blue piece of paper (back).” Story, Emelyn. Mrs. Emelyn (Eldredge) Story Autograph
Manuscript. Rare Books Department, Boston Public Library, Massachusetts.

The story of Fuller and Ossoli’s first meeting in Saint Peters in Rome in Memoirs is
followed by an account of how “This chance meeting at vesper service in St. Peters
prepared the way for many interviews; and it was before Margaret’s departure for
Venice, Milan, and Como, that Ossoli first offered her his hand, and was refused.
Mrs Story continues: --” (2:283). This passage of Memoirs matches word for word
what is written on the blue piece of paper (see figure 7). However, the original
passage lying underneath and crossed out with a pencil (see figure 9) differs
completely from the one in Memoirs—unfortunately, such passage does not figure in
Joel Myerson’s transcription of Story’s manuscript in Fuller in Her Own Time. I have
therefore transcribed Emelyn Story’s passage—“A day or two after this Margaret
observed that Ossoli walked before the house as if he had not the courage to enter

123



but still wished to see her. I think that she saw him only once or twice before she left
for Naples but at this point I am not certain.”

(Fig. 9) “Underneath the blue piece of paper. Story’s text.” Story, Emelyn. Mrs. Emelyn (Eldredge)
Story Autograph Manuscript. Rare Books Department, Boston Public Library, Massachusetts.

In his biography of Fuller, Higginson also used Story’s notebook to tell the story of
her relationship with Ossoli and it seems as though he managed to get rid of the blue
piece of paper and read the original passage, which he then rephrased in his own
words: “A day or two after this, she observed the same young man walking before
the house, as if meditating entrance; and they finally met once or twice before she
left Rome for the summer” (239).
Instead of depicting a romantic scene of courtship as the one described by
Story and Higginson, Channing chose to relate Ossoli’s first proposal and Fuller’s
subsequent rejection. Ossoli’s premature proposal is confirmed in one of Fuller’s
letters, “Very soon he offered me his hand through life, but I never dreamed I should
take it. I loved him and felt very unhappy to leave him, but the connexion seemed so
every way unfit” (FL 5:292). However, narrating her rejection as opposed to telling
the story of Ossoli’s shy and tender courting fosters a version of Fuller as more
powerful and generally superior to the “poor,” rejected Ossoli. In another instance,
after crossing out another section of Story’s notes, Channing wrote a passage to

124



justify his omission and signed it “W.H.C.” (see figure 10). Indeed, he gave reasons
for his editing and explained that “I have omitted this passage, because coming in
here, it gives the impression that the Storys knew of the Marriage then & contradicts
the after account of Margaret confiding the secret – More than that, I doubt the
accuracy of the account in some respects. W.H.C.. The whole narrative has more
order, [?] & effectiveness by letting the secret tell itself, at the right moment.”

(Fig. 10) “Channing’s justification.” Story, Emelyn. Mrs. Emelyn (Eldredge) Story Autograph
Manuscript. Rare Books Department, Boston Public Library, Massachusetts.

As later reported by Higginson, Channing had said that he had left out some
passages of Story’s text purely because of “literary convenience” (239). However,
the content of the paragraph that was omitted could also be deemed problematic for
different reasons than the ones stated in his note. Transcribed by Chevigny in The
Woman and the Myth, the section of Story’s text that Channing crossed out relates
how, “Not long after coming to Rome, the old Marquis Ossoli died and as Angelo
was his youngest <son> and only unmarried <one>, the care of his father during his
last illness fell upon him…. When at length his Father died, he told Margaret that he
<loved her and> must marry her or be miserable” (405). What is interesting here, is
that Fillipo Ossoli—Angelo’s father—died in February 1848 and, thanks to Story’s
note, we know that Angelo was then still “unmarried.” Therefore, the passage

125



implicitly suggests that Ossoli and Fuller could not have married before February, i.e.
that they married in or after the spring of 1848, when she was already pregnant (as
she had probably been since December 1847).
Some passages of Fuller’s and Ossoli’s private correspondence seem to
corroborate such hypothesis. In fact, in April 1849, Ossoli had written to Fuller,
“Dear, how much I wish to spend tomorrow with you, since I well believe you will
remember that it is the 4th April” (FL 5:224n), to which she had then responded “Mio
caro, Quanto e strana che noi non possiamo passare questo giorno insieme.
Bisogna pregare essere più felici un altro anno” (5:222)—“My dear, How very
strange it is that we cannot spend this day together. We must pray to be happier
another year” (FL 5:223). Since the two met on “Holy Thursday” 1847, April 1 st,17 it
therefore appears likely that April 4th might have been Fuller and Ossoli’s wedding
anniversary—an assumption which a number of scholars have made. In fact, this
hypothesis tends to support Marshall’s hypothesis, that “Margaret and Giovanni
almost certainly married in secret outside Rome sometime during Margaret’s
pregnancy” (355). Therefore, was it merely narrative convenience that forced
Channing to omit this passage? Or does the need to justify himself hide a second
motive, i.e. the fact that there was a possibility that Nino might have been conceived
when Fuller and Ossoli were unmarried?
The motif of “marriage” unsurprisingly pervades Memoirs’ version of Story’s
account. Yet, as we can see from figures 11 and 12, a number of references to
“marriage” were actually the product of Channing’s interference. In figure 11, the

“The scrupulously reliable Charles Capper states without equivocation that Fuller’s
first encounter with Ossoli took place on April 1” (Matteson 485n10).
17

126



expression “of her marriage” was added with pencil by Channing and appears in
Memoirs’ version of the text: “Then she told me of her marriage; where her child was,
and where he was born” (2:289). Although it is not apparent in figure 12, that
passage also underwent a considerable change: the original version “in the event of
her death” (see figure 12) was replaced by “in the event of her and her husband’s
death” in Memoirs (2:289). As noted by Chevigny, Channing “penned into Fuller’s
bedside confession her concern for her ‘husband,’ a word striking for its absence
from all of Fuller’s accounts of Ossoli” (Myth 403).

(Fig. 11) “of her marriage.” Story, Emelyn. Mrs. Emelyn (Eldredge) Story Autograph Manuscript. Rare
Books Department, Boston Public Library, Massachusetts .

(Fig. 12) “in the event of her death.” Story, Emelyn. Mrs. Emelyn (Eldredge) Story Autograph
Manuscript. Rare Books Department Boston Public Library, Massachusetts.

Although it cannot be established with certainty, it is likely that Ossoli and
Fuller did get married. The danger for children born out of wedlock was too high in
the Papal States—as written by Marshall, “Was there ever a risk that Nino might be
taken from her as a foundling?” (355). Matteson’s conclusion is that in “an age that
could impose crushing disadvantages on children born out of wedlock, however,

127



going on as before was out of the question”: therefore, although “No researcher has
ever been able to unearth a marriage certificate with the names Margaret Fuller and
Giovanni Ossoli,” except for the certificate of the Nino’s baptism, as previously noted,
“the existing evidence make it more likely than not that they were married, though
the time and place remain uncertain” (357).

Comparing Emelyn Story’s notebook of recollections with Channing’s editing
of it reveals how strongly the editors of Memoirs shaped their texts in order to fit the
image that they had envisioned for Fuller. Channing modified Story’s original
testimony and created a somewhat distorted version of reality: the fact that Fuller’s
marriage was told through an edited version of an indirect account gives us an
indication of just how far Memoirs could depart from the truth. Analysing the way in
which Emerson, Clarke, and Channing handled the task of writing the biography
reveals a great degree of embarrassment which suggests that on top of wanting to
protect Fuller’s reputation, the authors suppressed important aspects of both her
private and public life also to protect themselves.
After considering how Channing modified the content of Emelyn Story’s
account of Fuller and Ossoli’s relationship, I move on to more direct narratives and
look, in the second section of this chapter, at how Fuller told her own story. More
specifically, I focus on the unpublished fragments from the Fruitlands archive as I
compare Fuller’s self-writing with Emerson’s portrayal of her in Memoirs.

128



2.2 “I Feel Too Full of Thought, Like Light”: Margaret Fuller’s
Unpublished Journal Fragments
In a review of Woman in the Nineteenth Century published in The Leader in 1855,
George Eliot remarked that “Margaret Fuller’s mind was like some regions of her
own American continent, where you are constantly stepping from the sunny
‘clearings’ into the mysterious twilight of the tangled forest” (WNC 233). Fuller’s 1844
journal fragments, on which this section focuses, read as the intimate renderings of
those “sunny clearings”—days on which Fuller would write, “I think this must be an
important era in my life” (“Fruitlands Transcript” 16)18—as well as of darker moments,
which she described as times of “inward sadness” (MHarF13).
Eliot’s linking of Fuller’s mind to geography is interesting, for Fuller’s work was
greatly influenced by the places in which she lived. In Italy, where she spent the last
years of her life, she reported on Giuseppe Mazzini’s revolution in her Tribune
dispatches. Before moving to Europe, she spent two years in New York where she
was confronted with the realities of the urban world and deeply affected by the
dynamics of the city’s social system. Indeed, it was all very different from what she
had known in Groton, in Cambridge, or even in Boston, where she had spent the first
part of her life. Her trip to the Great Lakes and the Wisconsin territory in 1843, which
she recounted in Summer on the Lakes (1844), also had a major impact on Fuller: as
Lance Newman describes, it “forced her to confront the oppressive reality of
America’s developing social order and it started a process of rapid and decisive
radicalization” (67).
Purchased from The Goodspeed Book Shop by New England author and
preservationist Clara Endicott Sears, the manuscripts of Fuller’s 1844 journal

18 Hereafter cited as MHarF.

129



fragments were held at the Fruitlands Museum in Harvard, before being relocated to
Sharon, Massachusetts after their acquisition by the Trustees of Reservations in
2016. They include a ten-page long series of observations on woman and gender
that Fuller wrote in February 1840,19 and which she used as notes for her famous
Boston Conversations. The rest (and majority) of manuscript material dates from
1844; those pages cover the period during which Fuller finalised and published
Summer on the Lakes and started expanding “The Great Lawsuit. Man versus Men.
Woman versus Women.” The end of the journal entries roughly coincides with her
decision to go to Fishkill Landing in October, where she would finish writing Woman,
before moving to New York City in November of the same year. More specifically,
the 1844 fragments date from February, April, May, and June, but the corpus also
includes several misplaced entries from August and September (Berg and Perry
40n6). These do not appear in Martha L. Berg and Alice De V. Perry’s “‘The
Impulses of Human Nature’: Fuller's Journal from June through October 1844”
(1990) and consist of a complementary set of writings from a similar timeframe.
Never published in their entirety, the journal fragments under analysis here have only
been quoted in a small number of scholarly publications—see, for instance, Jeffrey
Steele’s 2001 monograph Transfiguring America (chapter 7) and his chapter on
“Margaret Fuller” in the Encyclopaedia of American Poetry (1998), as well as Joan
Von Mehren’s Minerva and the Muse: A Life of Margaret Fuller (1994), and Charles
Capper’s Margaret Fuller: An American Romantic Life. The Public Years (2007). In

19 In the second volume of Margaret Fuller: An American Romantic Life, Capper

quotes briefly from those fragments as part of his account of Fuller’s Conversations
(first series). The fragments do indeed match Elizabeth Peabody’s notes on the 16 th
and 17th conversations, which both took place in February 1840. It is therefore safe
to assume that Capper’s hypothesis is correct and that the “Feb 20 th” entry was
indeed written that year.
130



1995, Joel Myerson called the Fruitlands archive “perhaps the least-used collection
of Transcendentalist-related materials” (Myerson, “Catalog” 1)—and that remains still
relatively true today.
The Fruitlands journal fragments offer a more truthful portrayal of Fuller than
the one provided in Memoirs of Margaret Fuller Ossoli, in which she appears as
rather one-dimensional. While Emerson’s approach to narrating Fuller’s life
consisted in minimizing her radicalism—“In reciting the story of an affectionate and
passionate woman,” he wrote, “the voice lowers itself to a whisper, and becomes
inaudible” (MMFO 1:321)—Fuller’s 1844 journal entries consist in a celebratory selfportrayal that not only showcases her writing process during one of the most
productive years of her career, but in which she insists, rather than dimming, on her
own talent. The narrative is often metaliterary as Fuller describes her excitement as
a writer, “I feel too full of thought, like light” (MHarF 28). Only one paragraph in the
1844 fragments appears in Memoirs, Fuller’s writings being otherwise too personal
or too emotional to be reported in the biography. The content of her 1840
observations on gender is also, rather unsurprisingly, completely absent from the
posthumous work. Just as Robert D. Habich writes about another set of Fuller’s
writings, analysing the Fruitlands fragments provides us with yet another opportunity
to let Fuller “speak for herself” (280).
In this section, I wish to show how Fuller’s journal entries from the Fruitlands
Transcendentalist Collection contribute to our knowledge of her personal
complexities and how they also outline the evolution of her thinking on “woman”
during a pivotal time in her career. While in 1840 Fuller had just started her
Conversations series—the successful first year was recorded by Elizabeth Peabody
(Simmons)—1844 marked the end of the five-year project. For Belasco Smith, 1844

131



was “the most productive year of Fuller’s professional life” (“Discord” 78). In an
article entitled “The Animating Forces of Discord,” Smith indeed describes how
“[s]cholars have increasingly regarded the year of 1844 as a transformative moment
for Fuller, often seeing it as an annus mirabilis, a time of spiritual crisis and
conversion, as well as a time of deep personal disappointment about the men in her
life” (77). Smith’s article does not reference the Fruitlands material and instead only
relies on Berg and Perry’s publication.
In this section, I first analyse the ways in which the Fruitlands fragments offer
a detailed account of Fuller’s emotional and physical journey throughout the first half
of 1844. Focusing on “writing the self,” I consider Fuller’s journal entries as literary
texts and reflect on the process of self-writing by analysing the relationship between
the narrated and narrative “I.” Moving on to another type of “journey,” i.e. Fuller’s
physical strolls in nature, I examine her poetic relationship with nature and the way in
which nature becomes inspirational, acting as a drive for her literary work. Thirdly, I
concentrate on the 1840 section of the fragments and show how these entries
constitute an invaluable source of information on the evolution of Fuller’s theories on
gender, which she developed in “The Great Lawsuit” and in Woman. Overall, my
work aims to highlight those aspects of Fuller’s career that the authors of Memoirs
purposefully left out of their account in order to showcase the limitations of the
biography as well as to bring a more truthful account of Fuller’s thinking.

I – Writing the Self: An Emotional and Physical Journey

A) Transcendentalist Self-Writing
As Robert Sattelmeyer indicates, “[m]ost of the major figures associated with
Transcendentalism kept journals for at least some period of their lives” and their

132



uses “ranged from the occasional notation of daily activities to highly self-conscious
literary composition” (292). In a section of The Oxford Handbook of
Transcendentalism entirely devoted to “Journals,” Sattelmeyer comments on “the
dispositions of these journals” describing how “[s]ome have been lost or destroyed,
some were posthumously censored, some still lie relatively unexplored in archives,
some have been published in highly selective editions” (292). What’s more,
Sattelmeyer notes that “gender also complicates the history of Transcendental
journal keeping as well as the trajectory of scholarship about it” (295) and accounts
for the state of Fuller’s journals as follows,
Fuller's fame—or perhaps notoriety—was chiefly responsible for the distortion
and partial erasure of the record of her private writing. Ironically, the most
voluminous, long-lasting, and interesting journal by a woman prominently
associated with Transcendentalism—Caroline Healey Dall—owes its
preservation to the fact that Dall never quite achieved the sort of public
recognition that came to Fuller. (298)
The scattered conditions of Fuller’s journals are partly due to the ill-treatment of her
papers by the authors of Memoirs, who did not hesitate to cross, annotate, and even
cut entire sections of her writing, and also to the circumstances of her death—a
shipwreck, during which most of her belongings were lost. While some of her
journals did survive and have been published,20 many of them bear the marks of
heavy editing, as shown by a note by Berg and Perry on the 1844 manuscripts’
conditions:

20 In 1973, Joel Myerson published "Margaret Fuller's 1842 Journal: At Concord with

the Emersons" in the Harvard Library Bulletin, and in 1979, "Margaret Fuller's 1839
Journal: Trip to Bristol” by Robert Hudspeth appeared in in the same publication,
followed by Robert D. Habich’ "Margaret Fuller's Journal for October 1842” in 1985
and by Berg and Perry’s work in 1990.
133



The presence of . . . two editorial notations indicating missing pages suggests
that there was intention in or a design to their removal, perhaps because their
content was too revealing or in appropriate to the image of Fuller that her
editors wanted to communicate to the world. Such censoring practices by
Emerson, Channing, and Clarke after Fuller's death have been well
documented. In handling her letters and journals, her editors may also have
been simply careless. (54)
The Fruitlands manuscripts under analysis contain, in parts, annotations that are still
visible and that were most likely made by Channing21 while working on Memoirs. In a
letter to Thomas Wentworth Higginson, Channing proudly explained that “the book
was chiefly mine in conception and execution. All the material with the exception of
R.W.E. & J.F.C.’s private contributions passed through my hands” (“Letter”).
Although his markings on the Fruitlands papers are quite peripheral, Channing’s
“hands” were a major source of damage to Fuller’s writing as shown in previous
sections. As Cinthia Gannett, author of Gender and the Journal, points out, these
sorts of actions had consequences to women’s writing—“In addition to the workings
of literary canonicity, the conditions under which women’s journals have been
preserved or published have also worked to blur and trivialize women’s journal
traditions” (120).

21 These are in orange but were most likely written using red ink at the time (see

figure 13).
134



(Fig. 13) “Channing’s annotations on Fuller’s 1844 journal fragments: ‘This is M’s. Is it not? She gave
me two poems on this subject.’” Margaret Fuller Papers, Transcendentalist Collection, Fruitlands
Museum. The Trustees of Reservations, Archives & Research Center, Sharon, MA.

Although the annotations written in orange were made by Channing, it was Emerson
who was in charge of this period of Fuller’s life; it is interesting to look at what he
chose to include from Fuller’s life and work from that year. 1844 is the year during
which Summer on the Lakes, in 1843 was published (on June 4th) and “the Great
Lawsuit” expanded into Woman in the Nineteenth Century. It is also the year during
which Fuller concluded her Conversations for women (April 28th), during which she
finished her classes for young ladies, and left Massachusetts permanently. However,
in Memoirs, Emerson offers a very selective account of that period of Fuller’s life. His
list of Fuller’s achievements include:
She could converse, and teach, and write. She took private classes of pupils at
her own house. She organized, with great success, a school for young ladies at
Providence, and gave four hours a day to it, during two years. She translated
Eckermann's Conversations with Goethe, and published in 1839. In 1841, she
translated the Letters of Günderode and Bettine, and published them as far as
the sale warranted the work. In 1843, she made a tour to Lake Superior and to
Michigan, and published an agreeable narrative of it, called ‘Summer on the
Lakes.’ (MMFO 1:322)

135



Emerson also directly addresses Fuller’s contributions to the Dial, but he never
mentions her most important one, “The Great Lawsuit”—“she bravely undertook to
open, in the Dial, the subjects which most attracted her; and she treated, in turn,
Goethe, and Beethoven, the Rhine and the Romaic Ballads, the Poems of John
Sterling, and several pieces of sentiment, with a spirit which spared no labor”
(MMFO 1:324).
Not only does Fuller’s journal from 1844 inform us about her writing that year,
but it also holds literary value in a way that helps us counter the claim Emerson (and
others) made in Memoirs that “[h]er pen was a non-conductor” (MMFO 1:294). In this
analysis, I rely on Sattelmeyer’s remark that to “the extent . . . that a journal has high
aspirations and holds interest for us as more than a record of minutiae from the past,
it becomes subject to the same kinds of interpretive issues and opportunities we
consider when reading any complex text, whether fictional or ostensibly documentary
in purpose” (293). Certainly, Fuller herself felt insecure about her writing in a way in
which she did not feel about her conversation: in April 1840, she wrote, “When I look
at my papers, I feel as if I have never had a thought that was worthy the attention of
any but myself; and ‘t is only when, on talking with people, I find I tell them what they
did not know, that my confidence at all returns” (MMFO 1:295). In the posthumous
biography, Emerson also reported comments Fuller made specifically about her
poetry—“My verses, - I am ashamed when I think there is scarce a line of poetry in
them, - all rhetorical and impassioned, as Goethe said of De Stael. However, such
as they are, they have been overflowing drops from the somewhat bitter cup of my
existence,” “How can I ever write with this impatience of detail? I shall never be an
artist; I have no patient love of execution; I am delighted with my sketch, but if I try to

136



finish it, I am chilled” (MMFO 1:295).22 And yet it is important to note that there is
always a final note in Fuller’s comments that redeems her writing—“such as they
are, they have been overflowing drops from the somewhat bitter cup of my
existence,” “I am delighted with my sketch.” With regards to journal writing in
particular, Sattelmeyer indicates that Fuller “had a conflicted attitude toward journal
keeping” for “she favored the conversation and the letter over the journal” (296).
However, a note in Fuller’s second 1844 journal reveals how enthusiastic she could
be about such task—“I do not begin this volume of journal with the same eagerness
as the last. But that fulfilled so fully my expectations from it, was such a good friend,
that I cannot relinquish the habit, once begun” (Berg and Perry 56). Fuller referred to
her journal as a “good friend,” implying that journaling was a familiar activity that she
felt rather happy with. The expression “good friend” could be explained by one of
Gannett’s remarks, that for “women, the journal has been one of the few places in
which they could be writers and women, without paradox” (147).
Journal writing as “writing the self” is a task that unsurprisingly appealed to
the Transcendentalists, for whom as Buell writes “the self became a more important
entity . . . than for any of their forbears” (Literary 267). The form of a journal entry
particularly appealed to them because of “its very looseness, informality, and
irregular nature [that] gave it certain intrinsic advantages over more polished forms of
expression” (Sattelmeyer 293). And yet, going back to writing the self, Buell points
out that the Transcendentalists didn’t “really” write about themselves: “all shared a

22 Annette Kolodny challenges literal readings of Fuller’s self-deprecating judgment—

“This asks us to accept Fuller's anxieties about her writing skills as authoritative
critical judgments when, in truth, every [italics] woman author of the period-British
and American-larded her letters, journals and published book prefaces with
apologies for her ineptitude with the pen. Fuller was hardly the only woman of her
era to complain that in “fulfilling all my duties" to family and society she had lost the
precious time required for concentrated writing “and a literary existence” (359).
137



basic inhibition about revealing themselves” (269) and “most of what they
themselves wrote seems quite impersonal, including their own private journals. Their
poetry is highly intellectual; their prose metaphysical rather than familiar” (Literary
268). Buell also provides an explanation for this strange phenomenon: for him, it is
not
so much a Victorian sense of propriety which restrained them, although that did
enter in, as it was a matter of principle. If the first axiom of Transcendentalist
thought was that the individual is potentially divine, the second was that the
individual is valuable only sub specie aeternatis, in his universal aspects. . . .
This led to a rather strict self-censorship policy. (Literary 269)
Buell concludes, nevertheless, that “in general, the Transcendentalists fit into the
trend toward increasing self-consciousness in western literature as a whole during
the nineteenth century” (Literary 282).
B) Of Emotional and Physical Journeys
Fuller’s 1844 Fruitlands journal fragments describe—in a fragmented, patchwork-like
way—an emotional journey. They are the expression of a series of emotions about
which Fuller writes quite openly and bluntly. Her narration of 1844 begins with a
certain nostalgia that seems to have accompanied her most days, during various
activities: in one entry, Fuller recounts her ride home after having “[t]ea at Ellen’s”
We rode home very swift, the white horses schimmering in the moonlight slow
through the woods, so delicate in their half dress to be seen by this light. The
wind blew full and soft, the moon waded in thin clouds. We were all silent. I
wept and sobbed part of the way. I was glad to, it seemed so much more real
than anything else. It seemed perhaps the harrowing up to the needed

138



seedtime. I know not how the others felt: there was a wall betwixt me and them,
yet I was glad to be with them thus, the memory will be precious. (MHarF 1)
The Romantic interlocking of feelings and nature, as the “wind,” the “thin clouds,”
and the moon are not only described as phenomena but they are imbued with
emotions, makes for a powerful and poetic description. Although she is seated right
next to them, Fuller feels apart from the rest of the group: the others do not weep like
she does, but instead they are all “silent” and a “wall” seems to stand between her
and them. However, this is not a moment of pure sadness for there is appreciation in
Fuller’s recollection—“I was glad to be with them thus, the memory will be precious”
(MHarF 1). Fuller’s reminiscence is not only about herself, for her analysis extends to
the people she was with, about whom she notes “I know not how the others felt.”
Expressions of sadness, solitude, and frustration pervade Fuller’s 1844
journals: at times, solitude is painful—“I am so tired tonight: life is a great weight. I
want some help from without, something sweet and joyous but nothing comes”
(MHarF 15). At others, it is mixed with beauty or even presented as sacred—“My
chamber seems sacred to me, too, in its loneliness. It is full of flowers,” “7 th. Another
day of outward beauty and inward sadness” (MHarF 13). And in other instances,
Fuller does not even describe her sadness in her journal but only hints at it,
enigmatically—
There is one thought has come into my mind so painful that I will not
write it down but merely mark it thus
(Ultima)
(spoglia)
(donzella)
(lagune)

139



I shall know what it means. (MHarF 30)
Fuller’s use of the word “donzella” as code exists in other journals as well: as Berg
and Perry explain, “‘donzella’ is one of four words she will use as a code for a
particularly painful thought” (62n34). And what this “donzella” (which in Italian means
“young woman”) reminds us of is that a journal was not an entirely private document
in Fuller’s times. It was normal, in fact, for Fuller and the other members of the
Transcendentalist circle to exchange journals; and not only was reading others’
journals common practice, but so was discussing their content afterwards. In an
interesting mise en abyme, Fuller recounted in her 1842 journal: “Sunday
[September 25]. All this morning I spent in reading W’s journals for the last year, or
rather finishing them, for I have had them by me for weeks. . . . We talked over many
things in the journal” (Myerson, “1842” 340). Fuller’s use of “codes” in her journals
should therefore be seen as a means she used to protect her privacy and should
inform our reading of the rest of the contents of her journal. What needed to be
tacitly omitted, and what was it acceptable to relate?
The “sadness” that pervades Fuller’s 1844 journals has been attributed by
critics to a romantic disappointment that she experienced at the beginning of that
year when William Clarke, Sarah and James’ younger brother (who had been
Fuller’s guide during her Lakes’ tour), did not return her interest. Capper called it “the
third big romantic disappointment in her life” (138). This unrequited affection almost
put Fuller’s friendship with Caroline Sturgis at risk, when the latter apparently spent
time with William—“With Cary a moment. W. did return & they passed many hours
together. Ah thou tearful life, how much inward burning & stifling to a little bit of
objective reality” (MHarF 27). A sense of despair appears, at times, throughout
Fuller’s confessions from 1844; one entry that is particularly poignant in this sense

140



was quoted by Emerson as well as by George Eliot, who found it deeply moving23—“I
must, shall conquer, though now I feel so weary, and so sad, I have not a right to say
I will. With the intellect I always have always shall overcome, but that is not the half
of the work. The life: the life Oh, my God! shall the life be never sweet” (MHarF 24).
But Fuller’s pain is not only “inward” and the Fruitlands journals are
punctuated with descriptions of physical pain that Fuller also endured—“Walked,
then ended the day with a deplorable headache” (MHarF 22). This is something that
Fuller experienced all her life. Georgiana Bruce, a young woman who was mentored
by Fuller, and who after Brook Farm went to work at Sing-Sing, described the nature
of Fuller’s suffering in her autobiography—
Miss Fuller was a great sufferer from a severe spinal curvature, which had
developed after she recovered from typhoid fever, perhaps ten years before
this. She was now being treated by a Dr. Legère, a French physician who told
her that in six months she would be as straight as an Indian. She always wore
a thick pad over one shoulder blade to make it correspond with the other. Her
peculiar walk and some gestures indicated the painful distortion, and the
acute distress she suffered made it necessary that she should lie down every
few hours. (213)
In Memoirs, Emerson recounts how Fuller was often able to work through pain—
“She was all her lifetime the victim of disease and pain. She read and wrote in bed,
and believed that she could understand anything better when she was ill. Pain acted
like a girdle, to give tension to her powers” (1:229). However, Fuller’s 1844
Fruitlands journal seems to suggest that her suffering was at times too acute and
that she had to interrupt whatever she was working on: “I began to arrange my

23 She described these lines as “inexpressibly touching” (Von Mehren, Minerva 186).

141



papers, & write, but I could not do much. I am in much pain today and have to lie
down often” (MHarF 28). Headaches seem to have been particularly incapacitating
for Fuller. That is the case in various entries from the Fruitlands journal fragments;
for example, after she received Greeley’s proposal to move to New York to work for
the Tribune, Fuller wrote “Home Three letters, from Georgiana, Cary, Mr. Greeley.
The last contained his proposal. O I do hate to have so many things to decide &
while my headache demon too is seeming to vow I shall never do anything. I cannot
think about it till I am better” (MHarF 22). The letter from “Mr Greeley” has not yet
been recovered, but we know that Fuller received it in late August/early September.24
On 25 September 1844, she had already accepted the offer and described her new
position to Mary Rotch, “I am to edit the literary department of the N.Y. Tribune. . . .
some things that do not glitter might turn to gold. It is a position that offers many
advantages and may be turned to much good” (FL 3:230).
On top of strong headaches, Fuller’s journal also reveals that she suffered
from insomnia. Many of Fuller’s poems are about the moon, which she lay awake
gazing at when unable to sleep, “Say moon, dost thou suffer like me?” (22), “I sat at
the little window. The moon had been but a little time arisen. I felt stronger for the
future; clearness seemed dawning on my mind” (MHarF 28). Fuller even recorded
prayers in her journal about this—“It is late, I am tired, spirit, aid me in sleep. I make
no headway by my waking thoughts. How sweetly this rain falls, on the just and the

24 Berg and Perry see this as “further evidence that the material from these particular

Fruitlands pages properly belongs in late August and early September. . . . While
Greeley's letter has not been recovered, Fuller received along with it a letter from
Georgiana Bruce and one from Cary Sturgis with ‘a noble solemn tone.’ This letter of
Cary's has been recovered. Its date places Greeley's letter in very late August rather
than May or June as the rest of the journal entries in the Fruitlands collection might
have suggested. When Fuller received Greeley's letter, she was suffering a ‘terrible
headache,’ which persisted for a week, ‘the most suffering I have ever spent,’ (see the
September 8 entry of this journal)” (53).
142



unjust” (12), “O that some gentle care would lull me to sleep now. When I am so
tired, I cant sleep” (MHarF 15). Fortunately, it seems as though the insomnia
stopped at some point later in the year—“Thank heaven I have begun to sleeping
again, slept from twelve till seven and woke up feeling as if I had been with the
heavenly hosts so different from my many wakings this spring. Much, much is done
for us in sleep: then the Good Ones have some chance to breathe on us” (MHarF
29).
However, Fuller’s journal entries are not all about pain and sadness; as Smith
reminds us, “scholars may be focusing too narrowly on the notion of crisis in Fuller’s
life and missing the moments of joy, wit, and humor that also characterize Fuller’s
writing during this time” (“Discord” 77). Indeed, 1844 was also a year of joy and of
great self-realisation for Fuller, which she expressed very candidly in her journal as
when she wrote “Ah! I was not born to be patient or peaceful merely, but joyous and
nobly free” (MHarF 10). The degree of self-introspection and analysis here is
noteworthy: Fuller both reflects on her personality as being impatient and a little
restless, and yet decides to counterbalance those traits by positively reinforcing her
“joyous and nobly free” nature. In another instance, although she writes that she is
feeling “very, very sad,” Fuller nevertheless focuses on the positives such as the
beauty of Mt. Auburn—“Spent the afternoon at Mt. Auburn. It was of heavenly
beauty, but Oh, I am very, very sad. It is useless to make resolutions or arrange the
future but the state of my mind is so deep. I think this must be an important era in my
life” (MHarF 16).
These accounts, stories of emotional and physical pain, of reactions to lifeevents that affected her both positively and negatively, are part of the reason why
Fuller’s Fruitlands journals are so important. The openness with which Fuller

143



describes her “self” is invaluable and differs from the way in which other
Transcendentalists narrated their daily lives. Although he is not referring to this
particular journal, Sattelmeyer comments on the peculiarity of Fuller’s journaling,
noting that “what we see in Fuller's journal makes us conscious that Emerson's and
Thoreau's journals (though not Alcott's, it must be said) usually manifest a
conspicuous silence on the human frictions and social contexts within which this
high-minded enterprise took place” (297). Not only does Fuller relate her emotional
reactions and sensations, but she is also very self-analytical and, while she uses
some codes to hide her true feelings, her journal becomes the place where she
“unmasks” herself and reveals the real workings of her personality. In fact, although
a journal was not as private an object as we might think, Fuller’s entries in the 1844
Fruitlands fragments feel extremely intimate and revealing; there is a tension
underlying a number of her remarks between the “Fuller” in society and the “real”
Fuller who exposes herself in this journal. At one point she writes,
I thought Sam[uel Gray Ward] would certainly come to see me this which they
say is his last Sunday here, but he did not. I went to walk with Richard, then
sang psalm tunes with Lloyd, then wrote to Aunt Mary. When I have not joyous
energy in myself I can do these little things for others; very many of my
attentions are of this spurious sort: they are my consolation; the givers who
thank me are deceived. But what can I do. I cannot always upbear my life all
alone. The heart sinks and then I must help it by persuasions that it is better for
others I should be here and theirs. It is mere palliative, I know. (MHarF 9-10)
In this excerpt, Fuller’s honesty is striking as she reveals that some of her
behaviours were part of a façade—in fact, she explains that “very many of [her]
attentions” would only take place when she was “not joyous” and confesses that

144



numerous of her friends have thus been “deceived.” In the journal, Fuller is often
both self-aware and self-condemning (“I have been thinking tonight how I had found
myself like all I had ever condemned” [MHarF 11]): as Buell writes, the
Transcendentalists’ “main motive for introspection was self-improvement, in which
respect they were the heirs of the Puritans” (Literary 274). In a passage in which
Fuller reflects on her relationship with Cary Sturgis, she is clearly hoping to change
and improve—“Cary came and lay there with her head on my bosom. We talked till
one. Our relation will never be one of my friendships but its perfect sincerity is
wholesome. And I will do without friendships. . . . I could pray – O god make me
more sincere and ground me more deeply in reality” (MHarF 28).

II – Woman Writing: Of Inspiration and Aspirations

A) Nature as Inspiration
As Zwarg points out, the titles of Emerson’s sections in Memoirs do not describe
Fuller’s geographical peregrinations as is the case in the other chapters of the
biography, but rather they allow us to read “her through his familiar abstractions:
Arcana, Dæmonology, Temperament, Self-Esteem, Books, Criticism, Art, Letters,
Friendship, Problems of Life, Heroism, Truth, Ecstasy, and Conversation” (Zwarg,
“Feminist” 247). “Nature,” which Zwarg does not mention in this instance, is also the
title of one of Emerson’s sub-sections and reads as a critique of sorts of Fuller’s
ability as nature-writer. In it, Emerson is quite negative about the way in which Fuller
relates to the natural world:
Margaret's love of beauty made her, of course, votary of nature, but rather for
pleasurable excitement than with a deep poetic feeling. Her imperfect vision
and her bad health were serious impediments to intimacy with woods and
145



rivers. She had never paid, - and it is a little remarkable, -any attention to
natural sciences. She neither botanized, nor geologized, nor dissected. Still she
delighted in short country rambles, in the varieties of landscape, in pastoral
country, in mountain outlines, and, above all, in the sea-shore. (MMFO 1:263)
Memoirs is a text that is often unfair to Fuller’s talent, both in its omissions or blatant
criticism, but Emerson’s dismissal of Fuller’s nature writing as one that is limited to
“pleasurable excitement” and that never reaches the height of “deep poetic feeling”
reads as a particularly harsh statement in light of Fuller’s Fruitlands journal writing.
As she noted in a letter to Channing in September 1844, Fuller felt a very strong
connection to the natural world: “I am deeply taught by the constant presence of any
growing thing” (FL 3:224). In her 1844 journal, she compared her rich and dynamic
intellect to natural elements: “I feel too full of thought, like light” (MHarF 28). Fuller’s
days were indeed punctuated by writing and walks in nature, which in turn inspired
her to write poems about those landscapes.
When leaves were falling thickly in the pale November day,
A bird dropt here this feather upon her pensive way;
Another bird has found it in the chill snowy April day,
It brings to him the music of all her summer's lay:
Thus sweet birds, though unmated, do never sing in vain,
The lovely notes they utter to free them from their pain,
Caught up by the echoes, ring through the blue dome,
And, by good spirits guided, pierce to some gentle home.
The pencil moved prophetic together now they read
In the fair book of nature and find the hope they need.
The wreath woven by the river is by the seaside worn

146



And one of fate' s best arrows to its due mark is borne.
M.F.
29th May, 1844. (MHarF 24)
This poem beautifully summarises the content of the Fruitlands 1844 fragments by
Fuller. On the one hand, “pain” is present and, just as in Fuller’s life, it is apparently
interwoven with solitude—the two “unmated” birds fly separately, “A bird” here and
“[a]nother bird” there. The speaker, however, finds solace in the fact that this solitude
is quickly put to an end as the “feather” that one “bird dropt” is quickly “found [by the
other] in the chill snowy April day.” The overall message is optimistic, for the two
birds “find the hope they need” and “do never sing in vain.” Nature is perceived
through the prism of literature—“the fair book of nature” reinforces that connection
just like “the wreath woven by the river” reminds us of the plot woven by the writer.
This mingling of solitude, inspiration, and natural surroundings also pervades
another poem by Fuller:
Saw the moon for first time in an exquisite sunset sky, but over my left
shoulder, & was superstitious eno to be disturbed thereby
A waxing moon,
Shed influence mild
Sweet August moon
Grieve not thy child.
I must perforce follow thee
Demon of my nativity,
But oh succor me,
Angel of my futurity
May Genius, hover near

147



Drive away these thoughts of fear,
If I indeed be all alone
Cherish the more thy daughter lone
Make the woman all thy own.
Let the man defend
Till this strife and dark doubt end.
Make me purer
Stronger rarer O let not deadly fear
Creep so very near.
Centipede and scorpion
So near thy daughter's pillow lone
Send thy dove to brood
Over her shadowy solitude
There must be Love
Below around above
Let the great mind
Untiring rash to find
Steadfast stand to bind,
Till the soft heart the needed peace may find. (MHarF 17-18)
In this second poem, the moon, associated with a negative superstitious feeling,
illuminates the meanders of Fuller’s inward solitude. And yet, the speaker also
invokes the moon, begging her to “soccor” her—“If I indeed be all alone/Cherish the
more thy daughter lone/Make the woman all thy own.” Nature is almost a sublime
presence for it is associated both with feelings of fascination in the speaker’s eyes,

148



as is the case for the “exquisite sunset sky,” and with fear, “O let not deadly
fear/Creep so very near.” Just as with the previous poem, this one also ends on an
optimistic note: “There must be love,” Fuller ascertains. The poetic means acts as a
metaphorical hug, an embrace in which Fuller wraps herself “[b]elow around above.”
Solitude (“all alone”), gender (“the woman” and “the man”), nature (“Centipede and
scorpion”), and intellect (“Let the great mind/Untiring rash to find”) pervade Fuller’s
poem just as they pervade the rest of her journal entries, the “autobiographical” and
the “artistic” beautifully merging in her verse.
In Memoirs, however, Emerson comments negatively on Fuller’s “moonlight”
poems—“She wrote in her journal or in her correspondence, a series of ‘moonlights,’
in which she seriously attempts to describe the light and scenery of successive
nights of the summer moon. Of course, her raptures must appear sickly and
superficial to an observer, who, with equal feeling, had better powers of observation”
(MMFO 1:263-264); “Margaret, in her turn, made many vain attempts, and, to a lover
of nature, who knows that every day has new and inimitable lights and shades, one
of these descriptions is as vapid as the raptures of a citizen arrived at his first
meadow” (MMFO 1:264). Emerson’s remarks are once again dismissive of Fuller’s
nature writing, as he seems to have misunderstood the point of her observations—in
a quote from Fuller which Emerson chose to include in Memoirs, she explains “Only
through emotion do we know thee, Nature! We lean upon thy breast, and feel its
pulses vibrate to our own. That is knowledge, for that is love. Thought will never
reach it” (MMFO 1:264).
In the Fruitlands journal fragments, Fuller depicted with great admiration the
natural beauty that surrounded her—as on Sunday 2nd June, 1844, when she noted
“Wide waved the summer woods. Today earth appears in the luxuriant beauty of

149



summer; the woods are full leaved, the grass tall enough to wave in the wind. I have
a little nosegay of the mot pink. Rich thunderous clouds are stealing over. I hope we
shall have a shower” (MHarF 25), or on “Monday morning 6 th,” when she wrote
“Leaves and blossoms almost in perfection now, by tomorrow they will be quite. The
lindens are in a state of exquisite beauty. Not now the stately, the ‘dustere Linden’ as
when in the massive foliage of late summer, but just draped and adorned in every
line of their fair and noble proportions” (MHarF 11). There seems to have been a
great permeability between her and natural beauty; Fuller was able to appreciate the
surrounding landscapes with poetic sensitivity. The same sensitivity characterises
Fuller’s journal comments on music—“While hearing him [Ole Bull, on June 4th,
1844] I was happy and felt overpaid for existence by that degree in which I possess
the power of appreciating genius. I must hear him once more, though this is an
inconvenient time” (MHarF 16). During Ole Bull’s concert, Fuller recalls how “happy
[she was] there. I like himself much; he is sweet and childlike, and I think I never
heard such pure music. It was effortless and heavenly. I soon forgot his playing and
was lost. The Adagio religioso carried me entirely with it; it was so hushed, and yet
so deeply pleading. O my God! I too am capable of such feelings” (MHarF 15).
The fact that nature should be a key element of Fuller’s life in 1844 is not
surprising; on June 4th, 1844 her first book Summer on the Lakes was published,
relating her travels West the previous year. This protean travel-narrative was about
the new landscapes that Fuller discovered but, as Zwarg explains, it was equally lifechanging in terms of what Fuller learnt about the country itself: her travels indeed
brought forth
the recognition that some of the assumptions and interpretive models she had
used to build her feminist argument in ‘Lawsuit’ were directly challenged by

150



the terrible fate of the Native American. Her faith in the ‘great moral law’ (L: 8)
of Anglo-American culture, as well as the progressive view of history, wavered
when she saw how both could support the annihilation of cultures resisting
those perspectives. As a result, she returned to the essay with a healthy
skepticism about the assumptions underlying its argument, including her
decision to discuss the fate of women by drawing from various texts of
Western culture. (“Feminist” 167)
After Summer was published, Fuller began expanding her essay “The Great Lawsuit”
into what she called “a pamphlet”—Woman in the Nineteenth Century would be
published in February 1845. In the Fruitlands papers, one annotation relates the
suggestions that Greeley made for this “second edition of book on woman.” The
“Notes for improvement” include “Mr. Greeley observ[ations that] I had not said
enough as to the study of the physical laws being conducive to virtue / Not enough of
the need of providing a greater range of employment for woman” (MHarF 40). More
broadly, the 1844 Fruitlands journal fragments offer a deeply interesting account of
Fuller’s writing experience that year.
First, she writes about the day when she finished writing Summer, on her
birthday, 23 May 1844: “Better wrote this morning & finished booklet before one. I
hope they will get through printing by tomorrow or Saty eveg & then there will be
nothing else to be done about it, except to abuse it & that I shall not have to attend
to. Spent the afternoon at Mt. Auburn” (MHarF 16). Fuller recounted this specific
episode to numerous correspondents: first, in a letter to Caroline Sturgis written two
days later,
On Thursday I finished my book just at dinner time and passed the afternoon
at Mt Auburn. I thought much of the time when I, too, should drop this mask of

151



flesh, and who would finish my work. I had a fancy the child was born that
day, and hoped it would have been a boy. However my star may be good for a
girl, educated with more intelligence than I was. Girls are to have a better
chance now I think. (FL 3:197)
Fuller’s sister Ellen, married to the poet Ellery Channing, had given birth to a girl who
they called Margaret and nicknamed “Greta.” Writing to Charles K. Newcomb on 9
June 1844, Fuller returned again to that day “Was it the 23d of this last May that is
my birthday and was marked this year with deep strokes in the life of my mind” (FL
3:201). In Memoirs, Channing also reports Fuller’s words about her birthday that
year—“The 23d of May, my birth-day, about one o'clock, I wrote the last line of my
little book [Summer on the Lakes] then I went to Mount Auburn, and walked gently
among the graves” (MMFO 2:120).
The Fruitlands journals also tell the story of the writing process that led to that
moment of publication: “I finished preparing the first half of my book for the press a
little before six” (9). Once Summer was finally published, Fuller described how she
went through the book looking for mistakes, although she had already started
working on Woman—“Monday, hard at work till four oclock, arranging clothes &
papers & not nearly through yet. At six went to town on some errands, & brought out
my book. It looks pleasant, but there are one or two odd bits of carelessness which
escaped me, till I saw it as a whole” (MHarF 27). In June 1844, after the publication
of Summer, Fuller indeed reflected critically on her book and its reception—in a letter
to Channing, she remarked, “The account of the Seeress pleases many, and it is
amusing to see how elderly routine gentlemen, such as Dr Francis and Mr Farrar,
are charmed with the little story of Mariana. They admire, at poetic distance, that
powerful nature that would alarm them so in real life” (FL 3:198).

152



In the Fruitlands fragments, Fuller’s entries reveal that she liked to alternate
walks and writing, “Wednesday, obliged to go on with writing kept going out to take
short walks to revive myself” (MHarF 16), “trying to arrange these papers. I shall
never get through; they interest me too much and excite too many thoughts as I go
along. I had a walk this afternoon, but my thoughts swelled on and carried my steps
fast” (MHarF 28). When she couldn’t do so because of the rain, she would note it in
her journal,
It rained today, and I could not go into the woods or take the promised drive.
But, instead, I wrote all the morning, after playing with the children a short time
& filled up the gap in my book, of which I am very glad, as now I shall not feel
pressed or vexed by the demand for ‘copy’. It seemed to me I wrote well. I felt
more energy, more disengaged from the one or two fixed thoughts that have.
(MHarF 14)
Nature is what motivated Fuller to go Fishkill Landing in October 1844, where
she finished writing Woman: as she indicated in a letter to Sarah Shaw on 1
September 1844 “I am desirous for Octr and Novr to go to some beautiful and
solitary place, where walking about would be pleasure and excitement enough so
that I may give myself undisturbed to some writing and study I have in view” (FL
3:226). She mentioned this in her journal too, in an entry written on 5 September—“I
could go to Fishkill & I think I shall. Wrote awhile, feeling somewhat better. Felt a
strong desire to go to Cohasset, but knew if I did, it must be the ruin of my writing”
(MHarF 23). Fuller did go to Cohasset after all—she informed her brother Richard,
on September 20th, “I have suffered much from headach and lost much time. Last
week I went to Cohasset for two or three days. There was a noble sea at that time.
Since, I have been getting better, but my eyes are much affected” (FL 3:228). In fact,

153



although she wrote throughout the summer of 1844, Fuller suffered from terrible
headaches that prevented her from completing Woman and she went to Fishkill for
that reason—as she told Georgiana Bruce, in October 1844, “I was prevented from
attack of headach from finishing the pamphlet on Women in August. I hope to do it
here” (FL 3:236).
B) Writing and/on Woman
Not only do the Fruitlands fragments contain an account of Fuller’s work, but they
also include reflections on her past writings such as this entry about “The Great
Lawsuit”:
Last year at this time I wrote of woman, and proudly painted myself as Miranda.
At this time, seeing Mr. Tracy, I told him I had found peace. He did not believe
me: He was right. Much, much has been unveiled by the past year with its deep
cup of bitter sweet. Humbled I am, but as yet too proudly suffering from it. Make
me humble rather! (MHarF 4).
Miranda is a fictional character with whom Fuller “converses” in the “Lawsuit”—“I was
talking on this subject with Miranda, a woman, who, if any in the world, might speak
without heat or bitterness of the position of her sex” (Myerson, “Lawsuit” 394). But
here, rather than the “Lawsuit” itself, Fuller is talking about what happened in the
year afterwards, about that “recognition,” that Zwarg writes about, of the deep
corruption and violence of the advance into the West and of the country as a whole.
1844 was a pivotal year for Fuller in terms of her political and social realisations. In
the fall, she visited for the first time the female inmates at Sing-Sing, where her
protégée Georgiana Bruce had been working for a year. Bruce worked to help
rehabilitate the women inmates and, as part of the programme, she had asked them
to write about themselves. Bruce describes how “[t]wo [prisoners], at my request,

154



agreed to write sketches of their lives for me. It was only natural that some of my old
friends should be shocked on hearing that I had thus allied myself to the civilization
we condemned” (Experience 194). Fuller, however, wasn’t shocked and asked Bruce
to share more of these journals: "Cannot you send me more about those women, or
are you willing that I should transmute it into my own forms? I was greatly
entertained and in- structed by the journals. Continue, I beg, to note for me the
salient traits of every day” (Bruce, Experience 206). Fuller was deeply interested in
the stories of these women, as is evident from the questions she asked Bruce in
October 1844,
You say few of these women have any feeling about chastity. Do you know how
they regard that part of the sex, who are reputed chaste? Do they see any
reality in it; or look on it merely as a circumstance of condition, like the
possession of fine clothes? You know novelists are fond of representing them
as if they looked up to their more protected sisters as saints and angels! (FL
3:236)
Sing-Sing was a place of deep injustice, where all the cruelties originating from
racism, sexism, and poverty came together. Bruce’s account, which she shared with
Fuller, is that
Colored people were at that time convicted and given long terms on the
flimsiest testimony. There was one poor ‘aunty’ who had charge of the cooking,
who had been sentenced for fourteen years, in place of some one else. She
had seven children, who were left to starve, or become criminals. She was as
innocent of crime as we were, and her consciousness was noticeable in her
looks and deportment. (Experience 201)

155



Accounts like these as well as her encounters with female convicts had a strong
impact on Fuller. In Woman, she recounted meeting “a circle of women, stamped by
society as among the most degraded of their sex” (86) and, addressing her female
readers, she urged “those women who have not yet considered this subject, to do
so” and instructed them to “not forget the unfortunates who dare not cross your
guarded way” (WNC 87).
The Fruitlands papers contain fascinating entries about womanhood,
motherhood, and gender. May 1844, for instance, was a time when many of the
people Fuller knew had children—this includes her sister Ellen, Lidian Emerson, as
well as her friends Sarah Shaw and Sophia Hawthorne. In her journal, Fuller
describes a sweet scene in which her friend Sarah is nursing her baby, “Sarah
S[haw] wears a rosary & the baby plays with the cross, as she nurses. It is a sweet
sight. I have in my room a little copy off the Madonna del Sedia. Sarah & her child
have just that expression together of mutual bliss, but S seems more young & girlish
than this Madonna” (MHarF 14). Nursing is something that Fuller witnessed a lot that
year for Sophia Hawthorne, with whom she stayed for a while, was also nursing
Ellen’s child. These reflections about the intimate moments of motherhood contrast
with other more general musings about womanhood and gender that are also part of
the Fruitlands journal fragments. In an entry dated “Feb 20 th [1840],” Fuller writes, “I
confess myself quite unable to account for no woman having been able to produce a
great work of art” (MHarF 39). Many years later, in her book Gender and the Journal,
Gannett would try to provide an answer to Fuller’s question: Gannett writes that men
have been the “gatekeepers” of “public written forms and have controlled access to
writing and publishing, as well as the evaluation of published writing” and that

156



Women have not had the same access to public written discourse. They have
been denied the necessary education; they have been restricted by their
domestic roles in their opportunities to write; they have been repeatedly told
that women should not and cannot write in the public sphere. When they have
written publicly, they have been ridiculed, rebuked, or ignored. These sanctions
have conditioned women to think that they cannot be writers. (96)
In her journal, Fuller answered her own question and stated that “the natural history
of the sex is that at the period when men begin to be artists, they begin to be
mothers, an engrossing and still more disturbing profession” (MHarF 39). “[E]arthly
womanhood” (FL 3:226), as Fuller called it in a letter to Sarah Shaw, was as
“engrossing” as it was “disturbing” in the life of a woman. Fuller’s hand-written
reflections also served as discussion points for her Boston Conversations. Elizabeth
Peabody’s notes of the first series are, at times, almost identical to the content of
Fuller’s Fruitlands entries—for instance, Peabody relates how "It is true that at the
period of life when men gave themselves to their pursuit most women became
mothers” (Simmons 215).
Fuller, who in 1840 had no children and was not married, helped other women
overcome the obstacles that society put in their way. She did so, for instance, with
her Boston Conversations for women, which started in 1839. The Conversations
ended in 1844, and Fuller’s comments from her last class, reported in Memoirs by
Emerson, show that she felt empowered by how gratifying the whole experience had
been, “28 April, 1844. - It was the last day with my class. How noble has been my
experience of such relations now for six years, and with so many and so various
minds! Life is worth living, is it not?” (MMFO 1:351). But in the Fruitlands journal

157



fragments, Fuller commented on the end of yet another set of classes—on June 4th,
1844—
Wrote till 12. . . . Went to walk & was tempted too far into the little wood
beyond Mt. Auburn. (Did not get home till just before my class came. Was
obliged to lie on the bed all the time they were with me. It was the last time &
they were pleasant. They love me, and fancy I am good and wise. O that it
gave me more pleasure to do a little good, and give a little happiness. But
there is no modesty or moderation in me. (MHarF 15)
Writing once again with a remarkable degree of self-analysis, Fuller is here referring
to the end of a class for young girls she had taught in her home one afternoon per
week during the first half of 1844. Lydia Maria Child, whose niece, Abby, was among
the students, wrote to Fuller in August 1844 that her brother Convers "thinks that you
have done so much for his daughter's intellectual and moral culture, that you are a
prime favorite of his” (qtd. in Berg and Perry, “Impulses,” 111n162).
The actions that Fuller undertook to help other women were also
accompanied by a more theoretical reflection on the nature of gender, fragments of
which appear in the Fruitlands material. As she would write in her “Lawsuit” and in
Woman, Fuller believed that “there are moments in the life of each [man and woman]
when it seems legitimate to assume the character of the other” (MHarF 38). She
identified “infinite gradations on this scale” and concluded that “Are they not [man
and woman], as notes of music are, made for each other though dissimilar. . . He
momently grows mild while she assumes a bolder gait to wander at his side. Such is
the mutual influence” (MHarF 38). Fuller’s claims were extremely bold for her times
and the degree of permeability that she was able to identify between sexes is clearly
mapped out in the Fruitlands journal fragments. Dividing them between two columns,

158



she lists attributes that were considered as “typically masculine” and those that were
seen as “typically feminine” (see, also, figure 14):
Man more Genius

Woman more taste

Active Will

passive Will

Determined purpose

delicacy of rejection

versatile energy

power of adaptation

He collects

She arranges

He strikes out new materials

She harmonizes them for him

He has the strife

She is the aim

He more for truth & power

She for Beauty & Love.

(MHarF 38-39)

(Fig. 14) Fruitlands Manuscript page 24.6. Margaret Fuller Papers, Transcendentalist Collection,
Fruitlands Museum. The Trustees of Reservations, Archives & Research Center, Sharon, MA.

159



After this, Fuller wrote conclusively: “Yet is it more & less all through. I see no
attribute exclusively masculine, exclusively feminine” (MHarF 39). As Peabody’s
records show, Fuller used these writings as notes for her 17 th Conversation: “Miss F.
then read her own piece as she said that otherwise she should say every thing that
was in it, which would make it duller when it came- It was a constant contrast of man
& woman- Man had more genius-woman more taste- Man more determination of
purpose-woman more delicacy” (Simmons 216).
The Fruitlands fragments do not end there and this reflection on gender
fluidity is accompanied by another reinstatement of “the great radical dualism”
(Myerson, Reader 418): “the distinction of sex lies not in opposition but in distribution
and proportion of attributes. Whether this dualism will always continue I know not but
at present we cannot conceive of active happiness without it. To find oneself in
another nature, likeness and unlikeness. Sun acting on the earth are conjugal, - sun
and moon fraternal” (MHarF 37). This reaffirmation of gender fluidity is accompanied
by reflections that do also include more essentialist views of womanhood; for
instance, when Fuller interrogates why there aren’t more women artists, she
observes that “[w]oman as woman is deficient in concentration, but I see no reason
why she should not improve in this respect” (MHarF 37). However, she quickly and
ironically doubles her claim by noting that “as the poet is by nature equally deficient
in it why should it hurt woman as woman, more than poet as poet” (MHarF 38).
Similarly, while thinking about the relation between the two sexes, “in savage life,”
Fuller writes, “[t]he maiden stays at home and tends the rose tree (i e cultivates
beauty) and in the domestic sphere prepares herself for the succession of petty
efforts which are the destiny of woman” only to later write, wittily, that “I have no

160



objection to a succession of petty efforts instead of a few great deeds, if all
harmonized by law, if each be really a line or stanza of a poem” (MHarF 37).

Answering Smith’s exhortation that scholars should focus more on the
“moments of joy, wit and humour that characterise Fuller’s writing,” I find Fuller’s
dialectic on gender fluidity fascinating: Fuller’s conclusion and invitation, “Let woman
think of herself as soul still more than as woman and with a general conformity to her
lot in indifferent particulars, never dare stifle what God has given” (MHarF 38),
beautifully summarises and anticipates the turn that Fuller’s life would take in the
second half of the 1840s—“never stifling” and always expanding.
The Fruitlands journal fragments consist in a remarkable self-portrait by
Fuller, whose daily recollections are both confident and poetic. The content of her
reflections on gender, but also the moments of vulnerability she describes, tell the
story of a multifaceted existence which contrasts with Emerson’s monolithic portrayal
of Fuller in Memoirs, which I further explore in the next and final section of this
chapter by focusing on what I call the “Fuller dilemma.”

161



2.3 “Woman, or Artist?”: Emerson and the Fuller Dilemma in
Memoirs of Margaret Fuller Ossoli
In 1855, in a preface to Arthur Buckminster Fuller’s edition of his sister’s Woman in
the Nineteenth Century, Greeley wrote that “[i]t is due to [Fuller’s] memory, as well
as to the great and living cause of which she was so eminent and so fearless an
advocate, that what she thought and said with regard to the position of her sex and
its limitations, should be fully and fairly placed before the public” (X). Greeley’s
praise of Fuller’s radical views strongly contrasts with the way in which she was
portrayed in Memoirs. In fact, Greeley seems disappointed that Fuller’s five male
biographers (if we count, in addition to the three authors whose names appear on
the front page, Sam Ward and Frederic Henry Hedge, who also partly contributed to
telling her story) elided such important aspects of her career. Fuller’s feminist views,
and what she represented as a woman intellectual, generated great challenges for
her male commentators—and that continued to be true long after Memoirs was
published. As Mary Kelley remarks, “Mason Wade and Perry Miller,” who both wrote
biographies of Fuller, respectively in 1940 and 1963, “sensed the challenge that
Fuller represented”: while “Wade chose to cast Fuller in the womanly role of muse
and thereby denied her the status of an intellectual,” “Miller accorded her that status
and simultaneously made her unwomanly” (“Thinking Women” 38).
Fuller essentially posed a dilemma: as pinpointed by Ann Douglas, “Fuller is
so disquieting because she does not lend herself to the fantasy life, to the essentially
fictional identity associated with women. Her image can be attacked or ignored, but it
is not malleable” (38). As shown in previous sections, Emerson clearly struggled to
reconcile himself with the challenges presented by Fuller’s unconventional persona.
In fact, Fuller did not meet the expectations associated with her gender in the first
162



half of the nineteenth century: while “motherhood was valued as the most fulfilling
and essential of all women's duties, a view extending the eighteenth-century ideal of
Republican Motherhood” as Susan M. Cruea has remarked (188), Fuller suggested
she did not want any children, “I have no child; but now, as I look on these lovely
children of a human birth, what low and neutralizing cares they bring with them to the
mother!” (MMFO 1:293). What’s more, she also initially rejected marriage, writing
that “I remain fixed to be, without churlishness or coldness, as much alone as
possible. It is best for me. I am not fitted to be loved” (MMFO 1:292). As Emerson
relates in “Problems of Life,” Fuller was aware that she did not really fit any mould:
Practical questions in plenty the days and months brought her to settle, questions requiring all her wisdom, and sometimes more than all. None recurs
with more frequency, at one period, in her journals, than the debate with
herself, whether she shall make literature a profession. Shall it be woman, or
shall it be artist?” (MMFO 1:294)
The fact that Fuller did not fit in any specific category deeply unsettled Emerson; as
Tiffany Wayne explains, “his inability to imagine any social contribution from women
at all beyond the domestic role led him to categorize all women as either ‘wives’ or, if
freed from the particular duties of marriage (and, presumably, motherhood) to pursue
the life of the mind, as ‘muses’” (24). In this section, I demonstrate how the
dichotomy between “woman” and “artist,” which pervades Emerson’s portrayal of
Fuller in Memoirs, epitomises his difficulty to come to terms with what I call “the
Fuller dilemma”—a struggle which stems from both the unconventional nature of her
radical views as well as from the complexity of her social position as woman thinker
in antebellum America.

163



I – Of Social Inequalities and the Impediments of Womanhood
A) Of Harvard Education and Social Discrimination
Referring to a passage from Higginson’s biography of Fuller, in which he recounted
seeing “Miss Fuller sitting, day after day, under the covert gaze of the [Harvard]
undergraduates who had never before looked upon a woman reading within those
sacred precincts” (103), Kelley reflects upon the fact that the “image of a solitary
Fuller sitting amid books at America's most famous seat of learning tells us much
about a century in which an intellectual woman was considered an oxymoron”
(“Thinking Women” 33). Trapped in the antinomies of nineteenth-century
womanhood, Fuller’s life was continuously impacted by gender discrimination and,
although she knew that “[s]ex, like rank, wealth, beauty, or talent, is but an accident
of birth” (Fuller, Kindred Papers 335), her gender ended up defining her entire life
and career choices. In fact, when we ask ourselves what mostly differentiated Fuller
from Emerson, we find that the answer to that question lies primarily in the fact that
Sarah Margaret Fuller was born a woman and Ralph Waldo Emerson was born a
man. As Wayne remarks, “Fuller’s vocational choices and crises were philosophically
similar to Emerson’s as a Transcendentalist, but practically different as a woman and
as a feminist; as one scholar notes of Fuller, ‘in 1835 she was intellectually poised—
but for what?’ given the limited options available to women at that time” (90). Fuller
did not have the same rights as her male, white counterparts and that had an
obvious impact on her career and on her personal life.
Gender was a major factor of discrimination and its impact on Fuller’s life is
blatant. First of all, forced into a position of extreme financial insecurity, the need for
income defined Fuller’s life as it did for many other literary women. Kelley describes,
for instance, the consequences that Timothy Fuller’s death in 1835 had on the life of

164



his daughter: “Almost at the moment at which Fuller embarked on that career, it
looked as if she might have to cast it aside for Fuller died leaving his family with
slender means of support” (“Unfinished Revolution” 233). Kelley also emphasises
that, had Fuller “been the eldest son, she would have been appointed head of the
family and guardian of her younger brothers and sisters” (“Unfinished Revolution”
233). A few years later, still trying to secure for herself some very needed financial
income, Fuller began her Conversation series for women in Boston: yet, as Wayne
remarks, the “Conversations ultimately brought Fuller an income of approximately
$500 per year, a substantial amount considering that the course met only two hours
per week for twenty-six weeks out of the year. Still, . . . this would have been ‘about
two-thirds of what Emerson then made from an equivalent number of lectures’” (25).
Gender also had an immense and obvious impact on Fuller’s upbringing,
starting from her education. Although girls’ schools existed, they rarely equalled the
quality and richness of content offered at boys’ schools. Fuller’s father, however,
ignored such discriminatory practices and taught Fuller to read and study in many
different languages from a very young age. Often criticised for his harshness,
Douglas defends Timothy Fuller, suggesting that “another perspective from which to
view [his] schooling of his daughter other than the one which highlights its brutality”
lies in the fact that “there was nothing unusual about the work expected from the sixyear-old Margaret by her father – except that it was demanded from a girl” (44).
Setting aside the devastating consequences that her father’s schooling had on
Fuller’s health, Douglas praises Timothy Fuller’s approach: “In an age when women
were taught to appropriate a special language of politeness and complaisance, Mr
Fuller … forcibly cut her off from the feminine subculture, a world governed by
etiquette books and sentimental novels” (44). In short, “Timothy Fuller set

165



‘masculine’ ideals of character for his daughter, and he gave her ‘masculine’ subjects
to study” (Douglas 46). Douglas’ claim is particularly useful in so far as she uses
gender as a framework to understand the character-building effect that Timothy
Fuller’s education ended up having on his daughter. Despite her father’s efforts to
secure for her the same education that was reserved to men, Fuller’s struggles
continued throughout the years: university life was still formally precluded to young
women. As Kelley reminds us, with “the exception of Oberlin College, established in
1833, America’s colleges and universities excluded women until the second half of
the nineteenth century” (“Unfinished Revolution” 231).
In Memoirs, while telling the story of his acquaintance with Fuller, Frederic
Henry Hedge opened his account with a reference to Harvard College: “My
acquaintance with Margaret commenced in the year 1823, at Cambridge, my native
place and hers. I was then a member of Harvard College, in which my father held
one of the offices of instruction, and I used frequently to meet her in the social circles
of which the families connected with the college formed the nucleus” (MMFO 1:9091). As Hedge’s account suggests, women were only allowed at the periphery of
university life and were connected to young male students solely through common
“social circles.” Despite all that, Fuller did manage to get closer than normal to
college education: the fact that Fuller was the first woman to ever use Harvard’s
library “under the covert gaze of undergraduates” was, symbolically, very important.
As a woman intellectual, Fuller posed a challenge to the limitations imposed
on her sex in antebellum America. Through its use of the lexical fields of law and
justice, “The Great Lawsuit. Man versus Men. Woman versus Women” particularly
reveals the subversive value that Fuller conferred to the act of “writing” itself, which

166



she saw as a transgression of discriminating gender norms. Fuller was in fact aware
that:
As to the use of the pen, there was quite as much opposition to woman’s
possessing herself of that help to free-agency as there is now to her seizing on
the rostrum or the desk; and she is likely to draw, from a permission to plead
her cause that way, opposite interferences to what might be wished by those
who now grant it. (“The Great Lawsuit” 393)
Defying the constraining boundaries of domesticity, the act of writing was eminently
political in a society that condemned agency in women and prevented them from
developing their own identity. Cole remarks that, in addition to the trope of legal
complaint in its title “The Great Lawsuit,” “Fuller presented herself as the needed
counsel in women’s cause of regaining what was originally their own; by the essay’s
end, she had become prophet and legal advocate at once” (“Fuller’s Lawsuit”13).
Yet, as Cole points out, the profession of lawyer was completely closed to any
woman and Fuller’s “authorship introduced a metaphoric suit in the absence of any
such literal prerogative” (“Fuller’s Lawsuit” 13). Fuller herself was well aware of that
and, as she painfully acknowledged in “The Wrongs of American Women. The Duty
of American Women,” “We believe there has been no female lawyer, and probably
will be none” (487). Moving beyond the fact women could not be lawyers at the time,
Fuller addressed a higher law, a “universal law,” which she saw “as an agent of
change, above civil inequity” (Cole, “Fuller’s Lawsuit” 14). What clearly appears from
these few remarks is how aware Fuller was of the subversive power of writing, an act
not only elevating because of its craft and aesthetics but also inflated with a moral
dimension. And yet, Fuller’s writing was often and vigorously criticised by Emerson in
Memoirs.

167



B) Could Margaret Write? Emerson’s Violent Critique of Fuller’s “Art”
Emerson’s chapter “Visits to Concord” in Memoirs reads as an evaluation or review
of Fuller’s intellectual capacities—of her “art” intended as “the conscious use of skill
and creative imagination especially in the production of aesthetic objects”
(Webster). And while Fuller’s conversation skills are unquestionably and loudly
celebrated throughout the chapter, her other talents—including writing—are often
criticised and devalued. In addition to Emerson’s charge that her “pen was a nonconductor,” Hedge also stated that “She was no artist, - she would never have
written an epic, or romance, or drama” (1:95). Even Fuller’s brother commented
upon it in his 1855 edition of Woman in the Nineteenth Century, writing that “Those
who knew her personally feel that no words ever flowed from her pen equaling the
eloquent utterances of her lips” (V). Among her female friends, Elizabeth Barrett
Browning also attacked Fuller’s writing. In a letter to Miss Mitford written in
September 1850, she wrote:
the work [Fuller] was preparing upon Italy would probably have been more
equal to her faculty than anything previously produced by her pen (her other
writings being curiously inferior to the impressions her conversation gave you);
indeed, she told me it was the only production to which she had given time and
labour. (1:460)
and to Mrs. Jameson, in 1852,
Her written works are just naught. She said herself they were sketches, thrown
out in haste and for the means of subsistence …. In fact, her reputation, such
as it was in America, seemed to stand mainly on her conversation and oral
lectures. If I wished anyone to do her justice, I should say, as I have indeed
said, ‘Never read what she has written.’ (2:59)

168



It is no doubt that Fuller felt less confident in writing than in conversation: she said it
herself, as is reported in Memoirs, that “I shall write better, but never, I think, so well
as I talk; for then I feel inspired” (296). Yet, what were the reasons for such an
insistence on her “bad” writing? Could it have been motivated by a need to
denigrate, in some way or another, a female presence that was seen as threatening?
As mentioned by Zwarg, “[t]hose threatened by the [feminist] movement felt the need
to demonstrate how Margaret Fuller - the mythic embodiment of the feminist - could
‘fall like a woman’” (“Womanizing” 184). Although Emerson was a great admirer of
Fuller, and his personal affection and intellectual camaraderie for her are
unquestioned, I believe that the strength of his criticism towards her and the
denigrating aspect of some of his remarks remain partially underexplored. As Jeffrey
Steele noted in “Transcendental Friendship: Emerson, Fuller, and Thoreau,” “One of
the unresolved questions in both Emerson and Fuller scholarship is the extent to
which their friendship was shaped by nineteenth-century gender roles that influenced
Emerson's reactions both to his wife and to his female friend” (126). Emerson’s
critique of Fuller’s writing in Memoirs is especially ferocious: in particular, Emerson
suggested that the problem of Fuller’s judgment was that it was unreliable: in
“Letters”, he wrote “Margaret . . . had a sound judgment, on which, in conversation,
she could fall back and anticipate and speak the best sense of the largest company.
But, left to herself, and in her correspondence, she was much the victim of Lord
Bacon’s idols of the cave, or self-deceived by her own phantasms” (MMFO 1:279).
The justification provided by Emerson for his critique of Fuller “judgement” in this
passage is particularly interesting: it is by placing Fuller in a situation of dependency
from others that Emerson differentiated between the “sound judgment” that Fuller
showed when in “company” versus Fuller on her own, “left to herself . . . self-

169



deceived by her own phantasms.” The allusion to “Lord Bacon’s idols of the cave”
implies that when she was alone, Fuller believed “her own phantasms.” It also gives
full power to others for it is only when she was with “the largest company” that she
was able to restore “her sound judgement” and come out of her cavern of illusions.
Hedge’s remarks similarly mention the need for some “external pressure,” on which
Fuller’s success somewhat depended: “She wanted imagination, and she wanted
productiveness. She wrote with difficulty. Without external pressure, perhaps, she
would never have written at all” (MMFO 1:96). The need to anchor Fuller’s “bad
judgement” in a situation of social dependency whereby Fuller was a better thinker
when in the company of others makes us wonder whether gender and possible
insecurities were motivating Emerson’s comments.

II – Woman, or Artist: Gender and the Oxymoron of a Woman Intellectual
A) A Masculine Mind: The Oxymoron of a Woman Intellectual
Part of the struggle to deal with “the Fuller dilemma” was the lack of vocabulary to
define her. In fact, in antebellum America, womanhood was mostly associated with
passivity, self-sacrifice, and physical beauty according to the precepts of the “Cult of
True Womanhood.” Only rarely did “womanhood” rime with intellect or, even less
often, did it imply any type of agency. In the titles of recent scholarly work, the
adjective “thinking”—as in Wayne’s “Woman Thinking” or Kelley’s “Thinking
Women”—is often juxtaposed to the noun “women” to remind us that it was not
intrinsically evident that a “woman” could properly “think” in antebellum America. This
helps us understand why Fuller was once described as “one eminently womanly by
natural impulse, but a man by training and philosophy” (The Southern Literary
Messenger). Intellect was considered a “masculine” trait, and therefore Fuller was

170



often referred to as having a masculine mind; Memoirs of Margaret Ossoli is no
exception to this rule. In Hedge’s account, he struggled to describe Margaret as he
juggled with what he considered as hermetically sealed concepts of “femininity” and
“masculinity”—
Here let me say a word respecting the character of Margaret’s mind. It was
what in woman is generally called a masculine mind; that is, its action was
determined by ideas rather than sentiments. And yet, with this masculine trait,
she combined a woman’s appreciation of the beautiful in sentiment and the
beautiful in action. (MMFO 1:95)
Navigating with great difficulty the culturally imposed polarities of his time, Hedge
attempted to define Margaret’s genius: she had a “masculine” mind because her
actions were determined by ideas, yet she “combined” this masculine trait with “a
woman’s appreciation of the beautiful.” These dichotomies, “action versus sentiment”
and “masculine versus feminine,” are the same that oppose “woman versus artist,”
i.e. socially constructed oppositions. Fuller knew that such firm dichotomies or fixed
ideals of what a “man” and what a “woman” were mere “social definitions” (Wayne
89), that “There is no wholly masculine man, no purely feminine woman” (68–69).
Fuller’s statement strongly contrasts with the attitudes of the authors of Memoirs
who, struggling to come to terms with her complex character, awkwardly attempted
to fit her into fixed categories to which she did not belong.
B) The Problem of Fuller’s (Lack of) Beauty
The rigidity of gender norms in antebellum America made it indeed extremely difficult
for the authors of Memoirs to narrate Fuller’s life. Gender norms imposed on society
a certain ideal of womanhood to which Fuller, who referred to herself as “a radical
like me” (EJ 11:462), did not comply. Emerson’s chapter “Visits to Concord” and its

171



subsections in Memoirs are haunted by what seems to be a major regret: in
“Problems of Life,” Emerson wonders “why could not she also have been beautiful?
– of the most radiant sociality, why should not she have been so placed, and so
decorated, as to have led the fairest and highest?” (MMFO 1:291). The anaphoric
repetition of “why” (“why could she not”/ “why should not”) and of “so” (“so placed”/
“so decorated”) confers a sense of desperation to Emerson’s words. It is as if he
were personally and emotionally distressed by Fuller’s lack of (conventional) physical
beauty. In fact, almost every subsection of Emerson’s chapter “Visits to Concord”
begins with a reference to Fuller’s lack of beauty or starts with a negative comment
on her physique. For example, “Heroism” opens with “She was a woman, an orphan,
without beauty, without money; and these negatives will suggest what difficulties
were to be surmounted where the tasks dictated by her talents required the good-will
of ‘good-society’” (298), and “Friendship” begins with the concession that “It is
certain that Margaret, though unattractive in person, and assuming in manners, so
that the girls complained that ‘she put upon them,’ or, with her burly masculine
existence, quite reduced them to satellites, yet inspired an enthusiastic attachment”
(MMFO 1:280). Once more, as Fuller’s physicality exceeded the canons of normative
beauty of her times, Emerson had no other choice but to resort to the adjective
“masculine” to describe her (“her burly masculine existence”). At some point,
Emerson even recounted his surprise when he learned that Fuller had had numerous
suitors in Italy
When I expressed, one day, many years afterwards, to a lady who knew her
well [Elizabeth Hoar],some surprise at the homage paid her by men in Italy, offers of marriage having there been made her by distinguished parties, - she
replied: ‘There is nothing extraordinary in it. Had she been a man, any one of

172



those fine girls of sixteen, who surrounded her here, would have married her.
(MMFO 1:281)
Emerson’s surprise is reflected in the journal he kept while writing Memoirs: “In Italy,
Miciwicski wished to divorce himself to marry Margaret; Mazzini, it is reported,
offered marriage: & Ossoli [,] a young nobleman [,] prosecuted his suit against all
denial, & married her” (EJ 11:503). Emerson’s subsection “Nature” also begins with a
negative reference to Fuller’s physique: this time it is her “imperfect vision” and “bad
health” that Emerson comments upon, “Margaret’s love of beauty made her, of
course, a votary of nature, but rather for pleasurable excitement than with a deep
poetic feeling. Her imperfect vision and her bad health were serious impediments to
intimacy with woods and rivers” (MMFO 1:263). In an attempt to mitigate his own
derogatory physical description of Fuller (whom he described as having “a tendency
to robustness” and “little regard to hygienic principles” [91]), Hegde listed a series of
redeeming qualities about Fuller’s appearance—“I said she had no pretensions to
beauty. Yet she was not plain. She escaped the reproach of positive plainness, by
her blond and abundant hair, by her excellent teeth, by her sparkling, dancing, busy
eyes” (MMFO 1:92).
Despite the fact that there is surely some truth in these descriptions (for Fuller
herself lamented “I am such a shabby plant, of such coarse tissue. I hate not to be
beautiful, when all around is so” [MMFO 1:292]), it is necessary to pay a closer look
at Emerson’s attitude towards Fuller’s lack of beauty and to ask ourselves why it
turned into a quasi-obsession, whereby every one of his sections would begin with a
negative comment on Fuller’s physical appearance. While references to Fuller’s
“grace” and “ladylike appearance” in Memoirs led Zwarg to argue that “[e]mphasizing
Fuller's femininity in this way was thought to diminish the power of her example,

173



securing a conservative model of womanhood” (“Womanizing” 184), I believe that, in
the same way, emphasising Fuller’s lack of beauty was a way to react to her nonconformity, which posed a serious threat to the authors’ own masculinity, anchored
in such norms. As Zwarg points out, “Fuller was unconventional in every respect: in
her appearance, her manner, her thinking and in her writing. Every effort to frame
her in conventionality results in a destabilization of that frame” (“Womanizing 164).
Perhaps also in an attempt to conform her, disappointed by the fact that she was not
beautiful, Emerson kept associating Fuller’s name to other beautiful women. In fact,
she is constantly compared to other women in his chapter of Memoirs: “I am to add,
that she gave herself to her friendships with an entireness not possible to any but a
woman, with depth possible to few women. Her friendships, as girl with girls, as a
woman with women, were not unmingled with passion, and had passages of
romantic sacrifice and ecstatic fusion” (1:281). The repetition of “girls” (which
appears twice), the allusion to “woman” and “women,” and the references to
“passion,” “romantic sacrifice,” and “ecstatic fusion” over-emphasise Fuller’s
“womanly” circles. Similarly, Emerson adds elsewhere: “She and her friends are
fellow-students with noblest moral aims. She is there for help and counsel” (282),
“With her practical talent, her counsel and energy, she was pretty sure to find clients
and sufferers enough, who wished to be guided and supported” (MMFO 1:286).
Seemingly troubled by the fact that Fuller did not fit the canon of femininity, Emerson
kept comparing Fuller to other women (and women only) in these passages. By
insisting on the qualities that were typically associated with womanhood (“noblest
moral aims,” “passion,” “romantic sacrifice,” “help and counsel,” “practical talent,”
“sufferers”), it is as though Emerson had tried to create a fictional, textual separate
sphere in which he finally felt that Fuller would be at home.

174



Fuller herself was aware that women were constantly associated, reduced to,
and rewritten so as to belong to a separate sphere: “Much has been written about
Woman's keeping within her sphere, which is defined as the domestic sphere” (“The
Wrongs” 484). And it is precisely to that sphere, and to the “Cult of True
Womanhood,” that some of Emerson’s comments on Fuller directly point: “She was a
right brave and heroic woman. She shrunk from no duty, because of the feeble
nerves” (MMFO 1:300). As Cruea has outlined, “In a rapidly changing world where
men were charged with the task of creating and expanding an industrialized
civilization from a wilderness, a True Woman was expected to serve as the
protectress of religion and civilized society” (188). The adjectives that Emerson used
to describe Fuller, such as “brave” and “heroic,” and the allusions to “duty” and
“feebly nerves,” point to characteristics that were all typically associated with the
True Woman. Whether it was to protect her reputation from those who attacked her
“lack” of femininity or whether Emerson himself was immersed in the gender
stereotypes of his times, the language of the cult of True Womanhood is what he
resorted to in his description of Fuller. In particular, there is an emphasis on
Margaret’s “domestic” talents in his sections in Memoirs: “Margaret . . . devoted
herself to the education of her brothers and sisters, and then to the making of a
home for the family” (300), “She was exact and punctual in money matters, and
maintained herself, and made her full contribution to the support of her family, by the
reward of her labors as a teacher, and in her conversation classes” (300-301), “She
was here to help others” (MMFO 1:302). Echoing the principles of True Womanhood,
Emerson emphasises Fuller’s charitable personality (“to help others”), her capacity to
self-sacrifice (“devoted herself to the education of her brothers”), her domestic talent
(“the making of a home”) and her ability to be “exact and punctual in money matters.”

175



It is as though Emerson felt the need to mitigate the radical, unconventional nature of
Fuller’s existence by emphasising some more traditional traits: in “Heroism,”
Emerson stated that “Margaret’s courage was thoroughly sweet in its temper”
(MMFO 1:299), thus reaffirming the traditional separation of feminine sweetness and
masculine courage. The need to mitigate her unconventional character and the lack
of a vocabulary to describe Fuller forced Emerson into a constant dichotomy.

176



Conclusion
The fact that Fuller’s posthumous biography should narrate her life through the prism
of socially constructed gender polarities is both tragic and ironic. Indeed, claiming
that there “is no wholly masculine man, no purely feminine woman” (WNC 69), Fuller
fought her whole life against what Michael C. Hurst has named “the straightjacket of
nineteenth-century gender norms” (9). She undermined the validity of the notion of
“separate spheres” and argued that “the distinction of sex lies not in opposition but in
distribution and proportion of attributes” (MHarF 37). Eliding the most radical aspects
of her life and career, the authors of Memoirs provided a deeply one-dimensional
portrayal of Fuller. They did more than just censor her writings; they tampered with
original sources while trying to justify their editorial choices.
As I have demonstrated in this chapter, Fuller’s portrayal in Memoirs seems to
have been distorted by a sense of embarrassment at anything that pertained to her
womanhood—her privacy, her emotions, her physicality. In particular, the way in
which Emerson struggled to deal with Fuller’s appearance, with her social status,
and with her literary talent shows how difficult it was for him to accept her as both as
a “woman” and an “artist” and reveals the limitations of his views on womanhood. In
the next chapter, I further reflect on the notion of “embodiment” in Memoirs, as I
demonstrate that the same dynamics at play in his depiction of Fuller also
characterised his addresses on women’s rights.

177



Chapter Three – The Body Element in Memoirs of Margaret
Fuller Ossoli

Introduction – Of Textual Mutilations and
Biographical Embalmment
In July 1853, Emerson wrote a letter to poet Charles King Newcomb in which he
apologised for having misplaced some of the letters that he had lent him—“I fear
there is no help in Concord, or in the world, for the missing letters” (EL 4:373). One
year earlier, Newcomb had asked “that Margaret Fuller’s letters, which he had lent
for use in the Memoirs, be returned through express office in Boston” (4:294n88), to
which Emerson had promptly replied, “I shall not fail to send the MSS. letters of
Margaret to you, if I have them all, but, it may be, that some of them are in Wm
Channing’s charge” (EL 4:294-295). After sending those letters back to Newcomb on
May 31st (see EL 4:373n145), Emerson confessed, however, that although “Mrs
Fuller & Mrs Channing made up with much care all the parcels of letters to be
returned . . . many letters, & those perhaps the best, never came back to these
ladies” (EL 4:373). In the same message, he opened up about the way in which
Fuller’s papers had been handled during the production of Memoirs:
when the ‘Memoirs’ were being prepared, William Channing undertook to
arrange from all the letters in our possession the European journal,—& where
he had not a copy, or where nearly the whole letter was available, it was sewed
in, (with erasures & brackets) into its place, & went to the printer. When all this
‘copy’ came back, it was too much soiled & injured to be worth preserving — I
remember, however, that far the largest part was copied by one clerk, & only

178



now & then an original letter sewed in to these leaves — As the most part was
only a transcript, all of it perished. (EL 4:373)
According to Emerson’s account, not only were letters and journal entries lost forever
in the process of printing Memoirs, but even when “whole letter[s]” were used as
opposed to excerpts patched together, “erasures & brackets” permanently modified
their original content. This shows the extent of the damage that Channing’s handling
caused to Fuller’s papers and the irreparable, tragic mutilation of so much of her
written material.
Because of its highly mediated and corrupt nature, Memoirs requires to be read
alongside other texts. This is what I call the centrifugal force of Memoirs; every
analysis of the biography either presupposes a search of its sources or invites a
comparison with other similar texts. Although dealing with multiple levels of
mediation can be difficult, the intertextuality it entails is quite exciting. For instance, it
is interesting to compare Emerson’s depiction of Fuller in Memoirs with another
posthumous biography of a women’s rights pioneer—William Godwin’s Memoirs of
the Author of a Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1798). Just as it ended up being
the case for Fuller, Mary Wollstonecraft’s life was as much the centre of attention as
her work. As seen in Chapter One, Fuller herself emphasised the importance of
Wollstonecraft’s “existence” in Woman in the Nineteenth Century. Published shortly
after their deaths and written by men—one man in Wollstonecraft’s case, and five
men in Fuller’s—both biographies stemmed from a desire to protect the women’s
reputation, a task which the authors handled quite differently. As Janet Todd writes,
“it is worth pausing to think of the power of personal memoirs over reputation,
especially a woman’s” and the fact that these memoirs should be written by men is
equally significant: Todd mentions, for instance, how “[Jane] Austen’s life story was

179



for many years dominated by the portrait, created when her once occluded fame had
started to rise, by her nephew” (762).
The two memoirs tell the story of two controversial lives in very different ways.
While there is absolutely no mention of sexuality in Memoirs of Margaret Fuller
Ossoli, Godwin describes his relationship with Wollstonecraft in physical terms: “It
was however three weeks longer, before the sentiment which trembled upon the
tongue, burst from the lips of either. There was, as I have already said, no period of
throes and resolute explanation attendant on the tale. It was friendship melting into
love” (159). He openly recounts the reasons that led to his and Wollstonecraft’s
marriage: “We then judged it proper to declare our marriage, which had taken place
a little before. The principal motive for complying with this ceremony, was the
circumstance of Mary's being in a state of pregnancy” (162). This strongly differs
from the authors of Memoirs’ silence over the fact Angelino’s conception might have
preceded Fuller and Ossoli’s marriage (as discussed in Chapter Two). As Todd
explains, “Godwin had made sex a large part of his picture. In so doing he avoided
some of the sweetly sentimental terms used so often for worthy dead women whose
lives were paraded as role models for the young” (763).
In Woman, Fuller commented on “this little book” by Godwin, describing it as
“interesting for no other cause, it would be so for the generous affection evinced
under the peculiar circumstances” (43). More specifically, she applauded the fact
that “[t]his man had courage to love and honor this woman in the face of the
world’s sentence, and of all that was repulsive in her own past history” (43); she
observed with admiration that “[h]e loved her, and he defended her for the meaning
and tendency of her inner life. It was a good fact” (WNC 44). Fuller’s words about
Godwin’s biography pertain directly to the reputation of women intellectuals, a matter

180



with which Emerson and his two co-authors were also preoccupied when writing
Memoirs. In Woman, Fuller praised Godwin for the way in which he had defended
his late wife’s fame—“he believed he saw of what soul she was, and that the
impulses she had struggled to act out were noble, though the opinions to which they
had led might not be thoroughly weighed” (43). Although his biography somewhat
backfired (Angela Monsam remarks how it gathered an “overwhelmingly negative
response” [110]), protecting Wollstonecraft’s reputation was a crucial preoccupation
for Godwin: as he explained in his “Preface,” “It has always appeared to me, that to
give to the public some account of the life of a person of eminent merit deceased, is
a duty incumbent on survivors. It seldom happens that such a person passes
through life, without being the subject of thoughtless calumny, or malignant
misrepresentation” (1). Fuller looked positively at Godwin as a man of the “new
era”—“If Godwin’s choice of the calumniated authoress of the ‘Rights of Woman,’ for
his honored wife, be a sign a new era”—and welcomed their marriage as a sign of
progress, “These marriages, these characters, with all their imperfections, express
an onward tendency. They speak of aspiration of soul, of energy of mind, seeking
clearness and freedom” (WNC 46).
Compared to Godwin, and perhaps in light the disastrous consequences that
his biography had on Wollstonecraft’s reputation, Emerson adopted a diametrically
opposed approach when writing Fuller’s. Indeed, instead of insisting on her
radicalism, he polished it and tried to minimize it as much as possible. In an article
entitled “Biography as Autopsy in William Godwin’s Memoirs,” Monsam links
“Godwin’s assertion that it is ‘a duty incumbent on survivors’ to preserve in literary
form ‘the life of a person of eminent merit deceased’” to the practice of embalming
(117). She describes how the “inseparability of the self and the physical body

181



influenced both physical and biographical embalming; time is of the essence in both
instances, as the purpose of embalming is to ‘preserve [the subject] from decay’”
(Monsam 118). Similar to Godwin’s Memoirs, which was published only one year
after Wollstonecraft’s death, Memoirs of Margaret Fuller Ossoli appeared less than
two years after Fuller’s. Considering how one-sided Memoirs’ portrayal of Fuller is, I
believe that Monsam’s embalmment analogy could also be applied to Emerson,
Clarke, and Channing’s work. After all, this is what Higginson hinted at in his own
biography of Fuller, as he warned audiences to read previous biographies with
caution:
It must always be remembered that some previous descriptions of her have
been in a manner warped by the fact that they proceeded from the most gifted
and intellectual persons whom she knew; all these persons being almost
always men who she met under a certain amount of intellectual excitement, to
whom she showed her brightest aspirations, her deepest solicitudes. (303)
Higginson insisted on more than one occasion on the fact that numerous aspects of
Fuller’s personality had been left out of Memoirs. The way in which the authors
handled Fuller’s writing goes against what she would have wanted: “I am not willing
to have what I write mutilated, or what I ought to say dictated to suit the public taste”
(MMFO 1:168), she noted in 1836 about her work for the American Monthly. The
bitter irony is that this statement, quoted by Clarke, summarises what eventually
happened in Memoirs. Building on Monsam’s metaphor of the biography as
“embalmment,” this chapter centres on the notion of “mutilation” in Memoirs,
examining how, while the body of Fuller’s writing was mutilated, her identity was also
carefully moulded to fit a certain embodied image of womanhood.

182



Memoirs—a depiction of a woman thinker whose ideas challenged the
established social norms that enforced male, white dominance in the United States—
is a text which unwillingly reproduces the very norms that Fuller fought to abolish.
Focusing on how the notion of “embodiment” was eminently political in Fuller’s and
Emerson’s era, I argue that Emerson’s subjective portrayal of Fuller in Memoirs,
whom he anchors repeatedly to the notion of female body, shows that although he
wished women to be part of the polis, he also remained firmly convinced that there
were essential differences between men and women. In the first section of this
chapter, I analyse Emerson’s notebook “Margaret Fuller Ossoli,” which I believe can
provide exceptional insight into the reasoning behind Emerson’s editing of Fuller in
Memoirs. Highlighting the omissions, changes, and commentary that Emerson made
to the texts he was quoting, I reflect on the image of womanhood that emerges from
this more private version of his portrait of Fuller, and on how it compares to the final
version of his chapter in the biography. Secondly, in “Fuller and Emerson on
‘Dæmonology’: Bodily Functions and Biographical Representations,” I examine
Emerson’s and Fuller’s different conceptions of the body, showing how Emerson’s
depiction of Fuller in Memoirs, particularly his distaste for her inclinations towards
Mesmerism and her faith in bodily intuition, crystallize those divergences. In the third
and final section of this chapter, I look at the history of Emerson’s interventions on
women’s rights in relation to Memoirs: I show how Memoirs can help us understand
the dynamics of Emerson’s timid support for the cause.

183



3.1 From Emerson’s Notebook to Memoirs’ Body Text: Of
Editing Practices and Gender Discrepancies
In Sister Outsider (1984), Audre Lorde stated that the “dichotomy between the
spiritual and the political is . . . false, resulting from an incomplete attention to our
erotic knowledge. For the bridge which connects them is formed by the erotic – the
sensual – those physical, emotional, and psychic expressions of what is deepest and
strongest and richest within each of us” (56). Although written more than a hundred
years later, Lorde’s words are astonishingly relevant to our reading of Fuller’s writing.
Particularly in Fuller’s journals, we recognise “those physical, emotional, and psychic
expressions of what is deepest and strongest and richest” as Fuller alternates
between accounts of psychological joys and pains, expressions of physical suffering,
and narrative as well as poetical tributes to the natural world, describing landscapes
and writing about gemstones.
In May 1844, Fuller copied into her journal “some lines addrest to Cary
[Sturgis] about the gems”:25
Slow wandering on a tangled wayTo their lost child pure spirits say
The diamond marshal thee by day,
By night the carbuncle defend
Hearts-blood of a bosom-friend;
On thy brow the amethyst
Violet of secret earth.

25 See Hudspeth 3:194 for Fuller’s letter to Sturgis (3rd May 1844). The poem is

identical to the version copied in the Fruitlands fragments, except for “kissed” which
is spelt “kist” in the letter.
184



When by fullest sunlight kissed
Best reveals its regal worth;
And when that haloed moment flies
Shall keep thee steadfast, chaste and wise. (MHarF 2)
Further commenting on these “two verses from a letter addressed to Cary several
days ago,” Fuller noted how “these little extempore verses have to me a mystical, a
prophetic meaning. I remember with special pleasure my Dahlia of four years ago,
which was, like these, the full growth of a single moment” (MHarF 3). Fuller’s
association of verse with “growth” and “time” seems to be particularly compatible
with the way in which Lorde described poetry: calling it “the skeleton architecture of
our lives” (38), Lorde explained that for women “poetry is not a luxury. It is a vital
necessity of our existence. It forms the quality of the light within which we predicate
our hopes and dreams towards survival and change, first made into language, then
into idea, then into more tangible action” (37).
In Memoirs, however, Emerson criticised Fuller’s poetry (about which he
wrote, as noted in Chapter Two, “her raptures must appear sickly and superficial to
an observer, who, with equal feeling, had better powers of observation”) and was
captious about Fuller’s spirituality: about the latter, he wrote that “[t]his catching at
straws of coincidence, where all is geometrical, seems the necessity of certain
natures” (MMFO 1:222). Despite being overtly critical of Fuller’s fascination with
gems, Emerson copied the poem Fuller wrote to Caroline Sturgis into the notebook
he kept while working on Memoirs. The notebook, titled “Life and Death of Margaret
Fuller Ossoli,” has been transcribed and published in its entirety by William H.
Gilman (EJ 11: 455-509), and constitutes a very important, although rarely cited,
source of information about the process of Emerson’s biographical composition.

185



The notebook is especially important in that it allows us to compare what
Emerson wrote in it with what was eventually published in Memoirs. Indeed, the
problematic nature of the biography’s composition makes it necessary that we
compare it with its hypotexts. Although Gilman’s footnotes indicate which parts of the
notebook were used in the published version of Memoirs, he did not highlight any of
the changes or erasures that were made. I have compared each passage to the final
version in order to find these, and have also looked at Channing’s chapters in
volume 2, where some of the quotes transcribed by Emerson in his notebook ended
up. I also read the content of the notebook alongside other journals that Emerson
kept and more specifically alongside the entries he wrote directly after Fuller’s death.
Archival material (both published and unpublished) by Fuller as well as letters by her
and Emerson were equally useful, for they allowed me to find original sources and
highlight Emerson’s changes.
Going back to Fuller’s poem to Sturgis, copied on page 5 of Emerson’s
notebook (EJ 11: 457-58), it is interesting to remark that although his transcription is
identical to the original version of the poem, located in Fuller’s 1844 journal
fragments from the Fruitlands archive, the poem also appears in Emerson’s chapter
in Memoirs (in the section “Arcana”) where the name of Fuller’s friend Cary is
omitted (a practice consistent with the rest of the work) and a few silent changes can
be observed,
‘TO ————
‘Slow wandering on & tangled way,
‘To their lost child pure spirits say : —
‘The diamond marshal thee by day,
‘By night, the carbuncle defend,

186



‘Heart's blood of a bosom friend.
‘On thy brow, the amethyst,
‘Violet of purest earth,
‘When by fullest sunlight kissed,
‘Best reveals its regal birth;
‘And when that haloed moment flies,
‘Shall keep thee steadfast, chaste, and wise.’ (MMFO 1:220)
In addition to a few punctuation changes, the seventh line of Fuller’s poem differs
from the version copied by Emerson in his notebook and from the original; indeed, in
Emerson’s chapter of Memoirs, “Violet of secret earth” is replaced by “Violet of
purest earth.” In a book characterised by an endemic desire to conform Fuller to the
normative ideal of womanhood of the time, the substitution of the adjective “secret”
with “pure” is not an innocent one.26
In this section, I examine Emerson’s editing strategy in the notebook
“Margaret Fuller Ossoli,” to which no study has yet been fully devoted. Comparing
the notebook to Memoirs, but also to Fuller’s 1844 journals (Fruitlands; Berg and
Perry) and to Emerson and Fuller’s correspondence, I highlight the selection, the
changes, and the omissions made by Emerson as I try to shed more light on the
mysterious end product that is Memoirs of Margaret Fuller Ossoli.

26 One can only assume that this was Emerson’s doing; this exemplifies the

complexity linked to analysing Memoirs: being a shared act of narration, the
processes of selection and interpretation indeed remain vastly unknown.
187



I – Protecting Fuller
A) A Matter of Reputation
As with Memoirs, Emerson’s notebook is concerned with Fuller’s appearance and
with her reputation. For instance, Emerson quotes his aunt Mary Moody’s account of
Fuller (“Note from M.M.E. to RWE. Aug., 1850.” [EJ 11:501]) in which she
“remember[s] her want of beauty.” Aged 76 years old, Mary Moody wrote to her
nephew,
I think if [Fuller] had survived only her husband and been impressed with that
kind of grief which gives a sort of immortality to certain minds we read about.
Her expression &c &c — I may as well confess — that in taking and interest in
her fate, I do not love to remember her want of beauty. She looked very
sensible, but as if contending with ill health & duties. Had I been favored with
one sparkle of her fine wit, — one argument for her dissent <from her fine
mind>, —what a treasure to memory. She lay all the day & eve. on sofa, &
catechized me, who told my literal traditions like any old bobbin woman.
The tone of Mary Moody’s account is quite amusing; her resentment and bitter
remarks seem to have been characteristic of her personality. In Journal AZ, Emerson
indeed noted that while Margaret “had great tenderness & sympathy,
M[ary].M[oody].E[merson]. has none. If M.M.E. finds out anything is dear & sacred to
you, she instantly flings broken crockery at that” (EJ 11:259). Despite his aunt’s
attitude, Emerson included part of her account in Memoirs. Without naming her
directly, he introduced the author of the quotation as follows:
An acute and illuminated woman, who, in this age of indifferentism, holds on
with both hands to the creed of the Pilgrims, writes of Margaret, whom she saw
but once: ‘She looked very sensible, but as if contending with ill health and

188



duties. She lay, all the day and evening, on the sofa, and catechized me, who
told my literal traditions, like any old bobbin-woman.’ (MMFO 1:315)
Fuller’s “want of beauty” is something that Emerson repeatedly commented on in his
chapter in Memoirs. “The body,” as Xine Yao comments, “privileged as the location
of interiority, agency, and subjecthood, is always a metonym for more” (136). As
shown previously, Fuller’s body was one of those aspects that made Fuller’s
biographers most uncomfortable. Because she wasn’t considered “attractive”
according to the standards of the time, they had to think of ways that would allow
them to deal with that type of “non-conformity” while trying to protect her reputation.
Similarly, another aspect of Fuller’s life that Emerson, Channing, and Clarke
all addressed with some difficulty was Fuller’s “ego,” or as Emerson famously called
it, her “mountainous ME.” While acknowledging the often negative first impression
that Fuller made on people, Emerson tried to highlight the fact that she was also very
humble. In the beginning of his notebook, he recorded various passages written by
Fuller’s close friend Constanza Arconati Visconti. Extremely complimentary of Fuller,
Arconati described how “Je n’ai point rencontré dans ma vie de femme plus noble,
ayant autant de sympathie pour ses semblables, et dont l’esprit fut plus vivifiant. Je
me suis tout de suite sentie attirée par elle. Quand je fis sa connoisance, j’ignorais
que ce fut une femme remarquable” (EJ 11:457).27 This quotation was eventually
used as the epigraph to Emerson’s chapter in Memoirs “Visits to Concord” (see
“Extract from a letter from Madame Arconati to R.W. Emerson” [MMFO 1:200]).

“I never met before in my life a woman who was this noble, who showed this much
compassion for her peers, and who had such an inspiring intellect. I was immediately
drawn to her. When I met her for the first time, I did not know she was a remarkable
woman” [my translation].
27

189



Quoting Arconati was not only a way to celebrate Fuller, but Emerson also
viewed it as a testament to the latter’s humility: he remarked in his notebook,
The tone of the letters to Mme. Arconati is dignified, but respectful. M. seems
to have felt a certain awe of her, and in no wise to have assumed the tone of
superiority which Mme Arconati’s expressions would seem to have warranted
her in taking. Mme Arconati’s language quoted above p.

is very significant

when one reads all her letters & observes how true, sensible, [49] & dignified
she invariably is. (EJ 11: 468)
In another instance, Emerson similarly observed that although Fuller might seem
pretentious to some, “the tone of her journal is humble, religious, prayerful” (EJ
11:498).
B) Of Mysterious Erasures and Editorial Behaviours
A close observation of the notebook, i.e. a comparison of its quotations with the
original sources, reveals that even in the preparatory stages of the biography,
attempts were made to “polish” Fuller’s writings. Texts were silently modified to
appear less “dangerous” to Fuller’s reputation and omissions were made to fit a
certain narrative. As noted in Chapter Two, the most capricious editor was Channing:
he modified texts, and combined letters with journal excerpts from different periods,
making them look as a single piece of writing. But he wasn’t the only one who altered
Fuller’s original writing; Emerson did so too.
In the notebook, there are numerous examples of such practices by Emerson.
At one point, he transcribed a passage from Fuller’s 1844 journal, written when she
was staying with the Hawthornes at the Old Manse in Concord. The journal entry, of
which the original manuscript survives (see Berg and Perry), reads as follows: “After
the young men were in bed I went out and walked till near 12. The moonlight was

190



beautiful & filled my heart. Never before did I feel the beauty of these embowering
elms; they stood in holy blackness the praying monastics of this holy, clear night, full
of grace in every sense, their life so full, so hushed, not a leaf stirred” (Berg and
Perry 104). In the notebook, Emerson copied the passage indicating that it was from
“June, 1844 p95

at Hawthorne’s” (EJ 11:473) and made changes to Fuller’s text:

“After they were all in bed, I went out & walked till near 12, o.clock. The moonlight
<was beautiful &> filled my heart. I feel the beauty of these embowering elms: they
stood in holy blackness[,] the praying monastics of this holy clear night, full of grace,
in every sense; their life so full, so hushed, not a leaf stirred” (EJ 11:474). These
changes remained in the final version of Memoirs—“After they were all in bed,’ she
writes from the ‘Manse,’ in Concord, ‘I went out, and walked till near twelve. The
moonlight filled my heart. These embowering elms stood in solemn black, the
praying monastics of this holy night; full of grace, in every sense; their life so full, so
hushed; not a leaf stirred” (1:264). On top of removing “was beautiful &,” Emerson
also substituted “After the young men were in bed” with “After they were all in bed.”
Was the noun phrase “the young men” too risky to be linked to a woman’s journal?
In one particular instance, Emerson’s notebook serves to reveal the complete
disappearance of certain passages of Fuller’s journals. Writing in pencil, Emerson
took note of a reference to Fuller’s June 1844 journal; “See too Journal June, 1844
p67” (EJ 11:500). Berg and Perry, who transcribed that specific journal, have noted
that the “fact that in his notebook on Margaret Fuller, Emerson cited one of these
missing pages, #67 (by number only), suggests that others removed portions of
Fuller's writing after her death, probably because they contained passages of an
intensely personal and emotionally revealing nature” (91n115). We do not know what
was written in that entry on page 67; we can only rely on Emerson’s commentary:

191



“This I doubt not was all the more violent recoil from the exclusively literary &
‘educational’ connections <w>in which she had lived. Mrs Spring <said>told me that
Margaret said to her, ‘I am tired of these literary friendships, I long to be wife &
mother’” (EJ 11:500). The other journal entry Emerson is citing here takes us to
Fuller’s earlier 1844 journal: Emerson notes, “and p<5>49 May, 1844. ‘Where is
Hector?’” which corresponds to an entry in Fuller’s Fruitlands journal fragments. The
“Where is Hector” entry reads as follows,
There are sacred tasks enough before me; but where is Hector? There is no
sincere readiness in me, only a little shallow working from day to day.
Tomorrow, tomorrow, renew my youth like the Eagle’s tomorrow. Make me
again forever young!
Mignon, I have got beyond thee, though;I would not ask
So let me seem until I be. (MHarF 13).
Mysterious as these entries might be, the disappearance of page 67 is even more
compelling: what was written on that specific leaf of paper that needed to be
destroyed?

II – From Notebook to Biography: Emerson and the “Woman”

A) From Editorial Collage to Biographical Sabotage
Mapping out the collage of texts that constitute Memoirs’ sources can help us better
understand the impact that even the smallest modifications by its authors had on the
image they conveyed of Fuller to the public, for Memoirs was responsible for the
initial construction of Fuller’s reputation.

192



In the first pages of Emerson’s notebook, numerous passages relate to
Fuller’s foreboding about her trip back to America on the “Elizabeth.” Emerson
transcribed two letters that Fuller wrote to the “Marchesa Arconati Visconti” in
asynchronous order, starting with one written from “Florence, Evg. of 25 Apr. 1850”
and then recording another one from “Florence, 6 April, 1850” (EJ 11: 458). The
exactitude of Fuller’s premonitions is startling: on April 25 th, she confided: “I shall
embark more composedly in my merchant ship, praying indeed fervently that it may
not be my lot to lose my babe at sea, either by unsolaced sickness, or amid the
howling waves; or, that if I should, it may be [8] brief anguish, & Ossoli, he, & I, go
together” (EJ 11: 458). Angelino, Fuller’s son, did get sick on board, and the whole
family did “go together” as Fuller wrote. The passage, relating to the last moments of
Fuller’s life, was included in the second volume of Memoirs, as part of Channing’s
chapter: “I shall embark more composedly in our merchant-ship, praying fervently,
indeed, that it may not be my lot to lose my boy at sea, either by unsolaced illness,
or amid the howling waves; or, if so, that Ossoli, Angelo, and I may go together, and
that the anguish may be brief” (2:336). Note how “babe” was replaced by “boy” and
the personal pronoun “he” replaced by Nino’s full name “Angelo.” While the latter
change might have been motivated by a want of clarity, substituting “boy” for “babe”
seems to have been the result of Channing’s personal preferences. Was “babe” too
emotionally loaded to be reported in the biography? In the notebook, Emerson also
reported this other excerpt of Fuller’s letter to Arconati: “Perhaps we shall live to
laugh at these; but in case of mishap, I should perish with my husband & child
perhaps to be transferred to some happier state.” That same quote, included in
Channing’s section, was also slightly modified: “In case of mishap, however, I shall

193



perish with my husband and my child, and we may be transferred to some happier
state” (MMFO 2:337).
Passages which had been written separately were also merged in Emerson’s
chapter in Memoirs. While in his notebook Emerson quoted two passages separately
(both passages referring to the end of Fuller’s Boston Conversations), he chose to
merge them in Memoirs, therefore altering Fuller’s writing. She wrote, “To
W[illiam].H[enry]C[hanning] Cambridge, 28 Apr. 1844,” “It was the last meeting of my
class. We had a most animated meeting. On bidding me goodbye, they all & always
show so much goodwill & love, that I feel I must really have become a friend to them”
(EJ 11: 478) and “To E.H. without date” “Our last meeting yesterday was beautiful:
how noble has been <our> my experience of such relations for six years now, & with
so many, & so various minds! Life is worth living—is it not?” (EJ 11: 478). But in
Memoirs, the two quotes appear together “28 April, 1844. - It was the last day with
my class. How noble has been my experience of such relations now for six years,
and with so many and so various minds! Life is worth living, is it not? We had a most
animated meeting. On bidding me good-bye, they all, and always, show so much
good-will and love, that I feel I must really have become a friend to them” (1:351).
Emerson’s notebook is divided into sections—“Ill Health,” “Economics,”
“Friends,” “Travelling,” etc. The one entitled “Writing” is particularly interesting
because linked to Emerson’s famous charge that “Fuller’s pen was a non-conductor.”
As Reynolds remarks, “Too often, male commentators have compared her
conversational skills to her written work in order to denigrate the latter, but her
digressive, allusive prose style challenges her readers to view conventional topics
from unconventional perspectives” (“Fern” 69). In Memoirs, there are numerous
passages concerned with Fuller’s “bad writing” and these passages also appear in

194



the notebook. However, a comparison of the two texts shows that cuts were made
that alter the overall meaning of these reflections. In the notebook, Emerson reports
Fuller’s comment:
How can I ever write with this impatience of detail? The first suggestion of a
thought delights—to follow it out, wearies & weakens me. I am like Sterling. I
shall never be an artist. I have no patient love of execution. I am delighted with
my sketch, but the moment I try to finish it, I am chilled. Never was there a
great sculptor who did not love to chip the marble. (EJ 11:470)
And yet a section of that quotation is absent from Memoirs, in which the passage
reads as follows, “How can I ever write with this impatience of detail? I shall never be
an artist; I have no patient love of execution; I am delighted with my sketch, but the
moment I try to finish it, I am chilled. Never was there a great sculptor who did not
love to chip the marble” (1:295). While that quote seems to suggest that Fuller
altogether abandoned the hopes of being an artist, the sentence that she wrote and
that was left out of the biography suggests otherwise. Indeed, “The first suggestion
of a thought delights—to follow it out, wearies & weakens me. I am like Sterling”
showcases Fuller’s desire to write, and the fact that she compares herself to John
Sterling shows that she saw herself as an artist. The resulting image of Fuller is of a
much less self-deprecating and insecure woman than the one portrayed in Memoirs.
The same happens again a few lines later: in Memoirs, Fuller’s quote reads
as follows,
These gentlemen are surprised that I write no better, because I talk so well.
But I have served a long apprenticeship to the one, none to the other. I shall
write better, but never, I think, so well as I talk; for then I feel inspired. The
means are pleasant; my voice excites me, my pen never. I shall not be

195



discouraged, nor take for final what they say, but sift from it the truth, and use
it. I feel the strength to dispense with all illusions. I will stand steady, and
rejoice in the severest probations. (1:296)
But in the notebook, Emerson’s transcription is longer:
Then these gentlemen are surprised that I write no better, because I talk so
well. But I have served a long apprenticeship to the one, none to the other. I
will write well yet; but never, I think, so well as I talk; for then I feel inspired,
and the means are pleasant; my voice excites me, my pen never. —I shall by
no means be discouraged, nor take for final what they say, but sift from it the
truth, and use it. I feel within myself the strength to dispense with all illusions,
& I will manifest it. I will stand steady, and rejoice in the severest probations.
(EJ 11:471)28
Taken singularly, the small differences that exist between these two passages are of
limited importance; if taken all together, however, they amount to a polishing of
Fuller’s individuality. Indeed, the passages deleted by Emerson—“by no means,”
“within myself,” “I will manifest it”—all express a certain degree of self-confidence. “I
shall by no means be discouraged” conveys a sense of relentlessness (much more
strongly than “I shall not be discouraged”); “I feel within myself” emphasises Fuller’s
subject-position through the doubling of personal pronouns; “I will manifest it” also
evokes a strong faith in change and in Fuller’s power to achieve it. So not only does
the removal of theses phrases weaken the strength of Fuller’s statements, but the
erasure of the adverb “then” at the beginning of the first sentence confers to these
“gentlemen”’s comments a universal tone which was never implied in the first place.

28 I underlined the passages that were omitted in Memoirs.

196



B) Of Quotations and Accusations: Misunderstanding Fuller
Most of the quotations from Fuller’s writings in Memoirs were taken from her journals
and letters, an aspect which likely contributed to the biography’s success, as it
allowed readers to access Fuller’s private sphere. Although names were omitted in
the final version of Memoirs, these private excerpts are filled with a high emotional
charge; Emerson’s sparse commentary in the notebook reveals how uncomfortable
that made him feel.
Numerous quotations in Emerson’s notebook evoke Fuller’s sadness: in a
letter to her sister Ellen, written from Florence on December 11, 1849, Fuller
recounted how “[d]uring the siege of Rome I could not see my little boy. In the
burning sun I went every day to wait in the crowd for letters about him. Often they did
not come. I saw blood that had streamed on the wall close to where Ossoli was” (EJ
11:491). The violence emerging from this brief excerpt is poignant, as it conveys the
suffering of a mother and a wife in times of war. Traces of Fuller’s sorrow are also
present in other accounts where war is not mentioned, as in a letter to Caroline
Sturgis, which Fuller wrote in January 1848, “My days in Milan were not unmarked. I
have known some happy hours, but they all lead to sorrow, & not only the cups of
wine but if milk seem drugged with poison for me. It does not seem to be my fault, —
this destiny: I do not court these things, they come. I am a poor magnet with power
to be wounded by the bodies I attract” (11:492), and in March 1849, “All life that has
been or could be natural to me, is invariably denied’” (EJ 11:493). As these excerpts
show, Fuller suffered through life’s vicissitudes as a “magnet” who “attract[s]” certain
events. The idea of predestination, of “destiny” or, as she also calls it, “fate,” also
appears in a letter to “Lewis Cass, Jr.” which Emerson transcribed in his notebook,

197



Your letter was dated 5 Sept <on the anniversary of> which is [the] birthday of
my little boy. <5 Sept> ‘I wish I had received it then. I had, instead, the letter of
the London publishers, which, indeed, I had foreseen, from previous advices,
or rather perhaps, from a feeling of fate. It has been my fate that when I
worked for others, I <should> could always succeed; when I tried to keep the
least thing for myself, it was not permitted. (EJ 11:492)
While in his essay “Fate,” Emerson rather optimistically described how a “man will
see his character emitted in the events that seem to meet, but which exude from and
accompany him. Events expand with the character,” Fuller’s account of her “destiny”
was tinted with sorrow in a way that equalled “fate” to a certain tragic destiny rather
than self-realisation, or “expansion.” In “Fate,” Emerson noted that “[s]ome people
are made up of rhyme, coincidence, omen, periodicity, and presage: they meet the
person they seek; what their companion prepares to say to them, they first say to
him; and a hundred signs apprise them of what is about to befall” (CW 6:13) (as
Zwarg remarks, those words were clearly inspired by Fuller). For Zwarg, the
similarities between Emerson’s essay “Fate” and Fuller’s thinking show that Emerson
was convinced by her feminist reading strategy; that “he also was beginning to
accept the idea that the conduct of life was as much an allegorical or writerly field in
Fuller's sense as the field of religion was. That is, both were fluid and not fixed to
immutable symbols” (Feminist 279). I argue, instead, that Emerson’s rejection of
Fuller’s emotionality as “womanly,” that is, a weakening filter of her intellectual
capacities, complicates—if not invalidates—that reading.
Fuller’s writings were indeed unapologetically filled with emotions: as Lorde
would write much later, “As they become known to and accepted by us, our feelings
and the honest exploration of them become sanctuaries and spawning grounds for

198



the most radical and daring of ideas” (37). But that degree of emotionality seems to
have been misunderstood by Emerson, who viewed the expression of sentiment as a
deformation. Before transcribing a passage from Fuller’s 1844 journal (“O I need
some help. No I need a full a godlike embrace from some sufficient love. I know not
why, but the wound of my heart has reopened yesterday & today. My head aches”
[Berg and Perry 71]), Emerson noted that the “unlooked for trait in all these journals
to me is the Woman, poor woman: they are all hysterical. She is bewailing her
virginity and languishing for a husband” (EJ 11:500). The sexism of Emerson’s
remark shows that, even though he felt the deepest affection for Fuller, he was
unable to sympathize with her. Comparing Fuller’s and Emerson’s reformism,
Reynolds pinpoints that “Fuller advocates what Emerson does—self-reliance—yet
the key difference in their thought is that Fuller reveals all the obstacles
contemporary women face, which are invisible to Emerson and other men, who take
their freedoms and privileges for granted” (“Fern” 73). His comment about Fuller
“bewailing her virginity” is not sympathetic; it is rather derisory and shows Emerson’s
complete lack of awareness, at least in this instance, of the struggles faced by
women in nineteenth-century America.
In the notebook, Emerson was also critical of what he called Fuller’s
“sentimentalism”—a critique which made it into the final version of Memoirs, unlike
the previous comment. As noted earlier in the thesis, the accusation of being
“sentimental” was used as an argument to discredit Fuller’s writing and was tightly
linked to womanhood. In 1851, he wrote,
Margaret was a sentimentalist. That hitherto odious <n||. . . ||> malformation
nature in her case adopted, & was to make respectable. Just as . . .
Alexandrian Platonists clothed their master in brocade & spangles that have

199



drawn more eyes to him than his own diamonds; so here was a head which
[was] so creative of new colours, of wonderful gleams<,> so iridescent that it
piqued curiosity, <&> stimulated thought, & communicated mental activity to
all who approached her, though her perceptions were not to be compared with
her fancy, & she made numerous mistakes. Her perceptions are not accurate,
but her integrity was perfect, and she followed by love, and was really bent on
truth, but continually deceived by her fancy” (EJ 11:471).
While trying to embellish the fact that being “sentimental” was a bad thing by stating
that Fuller made it “respectable,” Emerson defined Fuller’s “perceptions a[s] not
accurate,” writing that she was “continually deceived by her fancy.” In Memoirs, he
slightly changed his text and sounded a little less harsh—"her perceptions were not
to be compared to her fancy, and she made numerous mistakes. Her integrity was
perfect, and she was led and followed by love, and was really bent on truth, but too
indulgent to the meteors of her fancy” (1:280).
Despite being clearly uncomfortable with the sensual nature of some of
Fuller’s writing, Emerson did not avoid the topic of sex and gender in his journal and
quoted some passages from Fuller’s private writing about it: “How all but infinite the
mystery by which sex is stamped on the germ! By what modification of thought is this
caused? Impossible to trace. Here am I the child of masculine energy, & Eugene of
feminine loveliness; & so in many other families. / A man’s ambition with a woman’s
heart, — ‘tis an accursed lot” (EJ 11:502). Although the word “gender” did not exist,
and Fuller could only rely on the notions of “sexes” and “woman” and “man” to
articulate her reflections, it is quite fascinating to see how she intercepted great
fluidity between these binaries—just as Yao writes, “when it comes to sex, there is

200



no such thing as the merely biological; when it comes to gender, there is no such
thing as the merely sociocultural” (136).

As David Leverenz writes in Manhood and the American Renaissance,
“Though Emerson challenges the social definitions of manhood and power, he
doesn’t question the more fundamental code that binds manhood and power
together at the expense of intimacy. Emerson’s ideal of manly self-empowering
reduces womanhood to spiritual nurturance while erasing female subjectivity” (44).
What emerges from this study of the notebook is how significant Emerson’s editorial
practices are, especially when examining his thinking on woman and Fuller’s
posterity. Critical about her sentimentalism and judgmental about her sexual needs,
Emerson seems afraid of Fuller’s body and, as a result, he modifies the body of the
text. The personal relationship between him and Fuller was always a complicated
one: in 1841, in Journal E, he wrote:
You would have me love you. What shall I love? Your body? The supposition
disgusts you. What you have thought & said? Well, whilst you were thinking &
saying them, but not now. I see no possibility of loving any thing but what now
is, & is becoming; your courage, your enterprize, your budding affection, your
opening thought, your prayer, I can love, — but what else? (EJ 7:400)
Memoirs seems to have encapsulated those fears; as Zwarg remarks, “some of
Emerson's circumspection came from guilt and confusion over the nature of his own
relationship with Fuller” (Feminist 241). Although Zwarg views Emerson’s editing of
Fuller’s writing in Memoirs as a protective gesture which does not reflect his own
opinion of her, Zwarg also mentions Emerson’s somewhat fearful attitude towards
Fuller’s body:

201



The trunk of love letters that drifted onto the Fire Island beach symbolized her
erotic life exposed. . . . When he mistakenly believes the trunk to contain
letters from a variety of her correspondents (in the last year of her life she
corresponded with over a hundred people), he broods about the discovery of
his letters to her, observing the ‘panic [that] would strike all her friends, . . . as
if a clever reporter had got underneath a confessional & agreed to report all
that transpired there on Wall street’. (Feminist 241)
Zwarg is here referring to Fuller’s reputation, which the authors of Memoirs tried so
hard to protect. I believe that, in addition to the issue of privacy (i.e. the authors’
concern about what people might think “if a clever reporter had got underneath a
confessional & agreed to report all that transpired there on Wall street” [EJ 11:258]),
the real cause of Emerson’s struggle was his inability to come to terms with Fuller’s
womanhood, and, in particular, with anything that related to her physicality and
intimacy.

202



3.2 Fuller and Emerson on “Dæmonology”: Bodily Functions
and Biographical Misrepresentations
In 1839, when Fuller began her Conversation series, she planned to answer two
questions, "What were we born to do? and how shall we do it?”. A few years later, in
Woman in the Nineteenth Century, she provided the following answer: “Let us be
wise and not impede the soul. Let her work as she will. Let us have one creative
energy, one incessant revelation. Let it take what form it will, and let us not bind it by
the past to man or woman, black or white” (WNC 69-70). A universal Soul, that
transcends the body, and that is accessed through individual progress by “creative,”
“incessant” work on oneself is a belief that Fuller shared with Emerson, Thoreau and
the other members of the Transcendental Club. However, it is also characteristic of
Fuller’s feminism; detaching the individual from physicality was a way to free them
from social discrimination. If Transcendentalists saw the soul as linked to
universality, Fuller believed in the centrality of the soul as a way to free woman from
constraining sexual identities (for “womanhood is at present too straitly-bounded to
give me scope” [MMFO 1:297]).
As Cynthia Davis points out in an article entitled “Margaret Fuller, Body and
Soul,” Fuller did not dislike the body: Davis explains that “what [Fuller] repudiates is
not the body or pain (as did Emerson) but gender” (45). She also pinpoints that “if
Fuller perceived the construction of gender in her own time to be restrictive, she was
capable of imagining a time when it would not be so -hence her emphasis on the
contingency of women's status” (“Body” 40). Davis emphasises the significance of
reflecting on the importance of the body for Fuller, who did not see it negatively even
when affected by pain—“Fuller's struggle for transcendence over pain helps us to
locate the place of the physical within Transcendental metaphysics” (“Body” 32).
203



In “Margaret Fuller, Animal Magnetism, and the Transcendent Female Body,”
Deborah Manson similarly demonstrates how “[a]n understanding of Fuller’s physical
ailments is critical when considering her feminist ideals, for it was her pained body
that led her to the liberating powers of mesmerism” (303). Through pain (mostly,
migraine headaches), Fuller came to see the body as a means for transcendence.
Manson describes how “Fuller’s interest in mesmerism developed in the years before
she travelled to Europe, from 1837 to 1845” and adds that although “[t]oday,
mesmerism is classified as a nineteenth-century pseudo-science, . . . Fuller believed
in the practice and from it derived a strength and confidence that fueled her feminist
ideology” (299). Fuller also tried to involve Emerson in these practices, inviting him
more than once to attend sessions with the “magnetized” Anna Parsons (FL 3:177).
As Manson explains, the “clairvoyant ‘Lady’ at the mesmeric gatherings to which
Fuller invited Emerson was Anna Q. T. Parsons”: “While in a mesmeric trance,
Parsons would hold unopened letters in her hand or touch them to her forehead and
provide psychic character readings of the authors of those letters” (Manson 298).
Anna Quincy Thaxter Parsons, active in religious and reform groups, wrote for the
New-York Daily Tribune and founded the Boston Women’s Associationists Union (FL
3:179n3).
Emerson politely rejected Fuller’s invitation on 16 February 1844: “As for the
metaphysics & ethics of the personal & mesmeric question you have put, I will not
now enter so deep waters lest the mail leave my letter” (EL 2:241). He was indeed
much less at ease with mesmerism than Fuller was: as he wrote in 1840 to Sturgis, “I
am a slow scholar at magnetism, dear sister, & always read the newspaper whilst
that subject is discussed. I do not pretend to understand anything in your last letter
but its lyric measures wh. are always beautiful to me. . . . I must even leave you and

204



Margaret to your flights in the sky, wishing you pleasant airs & a safe alighting” (EL
2:346-347). Fuller was aware of Emerson’s skepticism, something which had caused
much friction between them throughout the years: in a letter written on January
28th,1844, she told him, “I suppose Lidian told you of Miss Parson’s reading a letter
of yours under Mesmeric influence (of which you make light, so wittily) but as she
may not remember all she heard I shall try to write down exactly what James and
Sarah told me about it” (FL 3:177). The brackets “of which you make light, so wittily”
reveal Fuller’s frustration with Emerson’s long-time refusal to engage in the practices
she found so interesting. In another letter to Emerson from 1844, Fuller similarly
referred to his skepticism: “Sarah Clarke,” Fuller wrote,
had fully intended to invite our new Ecstatica for Monday Evening, and submit
to your eye the same revelations as to ours, when she was informed by
Caroline that you had spoken of such experiments as ‘peeping through the
keyhole,’ and such like. Sarah then says, ‘Have I a right to expose this delicate
girl, whom I highly respect, to the scrutiny of one before whom she is to appear
as a suspected person?’ (FL 3:181).
After this, Fuller inserted in her letter a fictional dialogue between her and Sarah
Clarke, in which she alluded to Emerson’s skepticism—“M[argaret]. It is to be
remembered that many of his friends have been obliged to approach Mr E. in that
character. I myself occupied it opposite him for some years” (FL 3:181)
In journal entries from the same year, Fuller mentions Anna Parsons: “I read
over Charles's character by Miss Parsons: it is the best, or rather the most searching
one I have ever seen by her” (MHarF 29-30). Fuller continues,
I dont know that she seizes leading traits better than she did with William or Mr.
E. What she says of his being like an ‘eastern magician’, ‘the cells & caverns’

205



the mirthfulness that gleams across the character like sunlight across the dark
pine woods, of him walking with his head down & trailing a little switch, of his
starting from God, and then returning to him, of his loving man as the child of
God rather than God as the Father of man; these and other traits are very
good. (MHarF 30)
Fuller reported this commentary of Parsons’ readings to Newcomb himself: on June
9th, she wrote to him, “I think the reading of you in many respects excellent, of the
‘eastern magician,’ the gleams of sunlight across the dark pine woods, and trailing
the little switch. She has seized with force several leading traits, and went much
deeper than she did with mine” (FL 3:201).
In this section of Chapter Three, I analyse Emerson’s contradictory approach
to the body in his commentary of Fuller’s 1840 turn to mesmerism in Memoirs. While
he rejected Fuller’s view of the body as a means of transcendence (both in terms of
spirituality and feminism), Emerson simultaneously stressed throughout Memoirs a
“sentimental materiality that Fuller spent her brief life struggling to defy” (Davis,
“Body” 48). Emerson’s sections “Arcana,” “Dæmonology,” and “Ecstasy” are indeed
marked by constant returns to the notion of physicality, which is presented as a
defining characteristic of womanhood and as an impediment to a woman’s intellect.
This stands in contrast with Fuller’s feminist vision. In fact, as demonstrated by
Manson and Davis, Fuller understood that a disembodied vision of transcendence
was the privilege of male thinkers and chose to celebrate, rather than to denigrate,
the body as an instrument of elevation. While she preferred to speak universally and
addressed herself to “mankind,” Fuller simultaneously acknowledged the (female)
body as a site, among others, of positive individual transformation.

206



In my analysis of Emerson’ sections “Arcana,” “Dæmonology,” and “Ecstasy,”
I also wish to enter in conversation with Zwarg’s and Hanlon’s commentaries of
Memoirs. In Feminist Conversations, Zwarg contends that
Waldo employ[s] familiar title headings such as ‘Nature,’ ‘Dæmonology,’ and
‘Friendship’ in an attempt to show how Fuller embodies a threat to the usual
reading of these themes. Once we understand how the text has been built up,
layering one ‘hailing’ of the subject upon another, we begin to see how Fuller
always encourages the cross-reading of these subjects in Emerson's work.
Waldo is consistently forced to interrupt his way of describing each concept in
order to accommodate Fuller's perspective. (248)
While I agree with Zwarg’s reading that Emerson tries, as much as possible, to
include Fuller’s views on spirituality and the body in Memoirs (he literally juxtaposes
her assertions to his, leaving it to the reader to choose which one to side with), I also
believe that his framing, sceptical commentary reveals the failure—and not the
success—of Emerson’s attempt to learn from her. I offer a comparative reading of
his lecture on “Dæmonology” (1839) and of his sections in Memoirs “Arcana,
“Dæmonology,” and “Ecstasy” to show how his mistrust of such practices perdured
through the years.
Without commenting directly on mesmerism, Hanlon addresses the famous
1840-1841 friendship crisis between Emerson and Fuller in Emerson’s Memory
Loss, explaining how it was triggered by the former’s refusal to welcome Fuller’s
“change,” which primarily consisted in a spiritual revelation that had all to do with
mesmerism. Hanlon states that “the shift in Emerson’s affective politics . . . has much
to do with his reconsideration of Fuller’s charge that he had failed her as a friend is
perhaps most visible in the transformed ways Emerson had of articulating that

207



abolitionist certainty from the days of their dispute into his period of abolitionist
writing during the mid-1850s” (82). I respond to Hanlon’s “reconsideration of Fuller’s
charge” and argue that Emerson’s depiction of Fuller’s body in Memoirs represents a
step back from and not forward towards that kind of progressive thinking.

I – Fuller and Emerson on the Body
A) Fuller’s Dual Relation with the Body
In an often-quoted passage from Memoirs, Emerson describes Fuller as someone
who “had a feeling that she ought to have been a man, and said of herself, ‘A man's
ambition with a woman's heart, is an evil lot’” (MMFO 1:229). This particular passage
is interesting for a number of reasons. Firstly, Emerson introduces Fuller’s quote in a
way that manipulates the reader’s understanding of what she really meant. The fact
that she had an ambition that exceeded what was usually expected from women
does not necessarily mean that she felt that she should have been a man. Also, the
association of the “intellect” with “man” and of the “heart” with “woman” is one on
which gender discrimination based itself for a long time, and in that, Emerson
acknowledged Fuller as a subversive figure. However easier it might have made
things, Fuller did not want to be a man. In fact, as critics have shown, her writing can
be seen as a celebration of womanhood. Gustafson demonstrates how instead of
adopting traditionally male platforms and manners of expression to gain the trust of
an audience more easily, Fuller decided instead to reinforce women’s forms of
expression:
Despite Fuller's celebrated androgyny, her most radical contribution to feminist
thought was not her insistence on her ability to speak, write, and think in
masculine modes. . . . Rather, Fuller contributed a model for joining feminine

208



content to feminine form and made that one option among several for women
seeking new expressive possibilities to legitimate their public presence.
(Gustafson 40)
If reusing male modes of expression meant sabotaging her feminist message,
Fuller’s feminism consisted in utilizing female modes of expression to ascertain
female power; and that is precisely what Emerson misunderstood. His accusation of
“sentimentalism” in Memoirs resulted from a profound misunderstanding of Fuller’s
feminist strategy which, as Gustafson contends, consisted in experimenting “with
voice and form within sentimentalism to address the problems of women's
relationship to a public language shaped primarily by men” (39).
The tendency to state that Fuller “should have” been a man was apparently
quite widespread; and yet, in Woman in the Nineteenth Century, Fuller was much
more convinced that one should strive to improve the condition of woman, than that
she wished to be a man. A number of passages in Woman show that Fuller did not
want to be a man: about “Georges Sand,” whose real name was Amantine Lucile
Aurore Dupin, she wrote “Georges Sand smokes, wears male attire, wishes to be
addressed as ‘Mon frère’;—perhaps, if she found those who were as brothers,
indeed, she would not care whether she were brother or sister” (WNC 44). Fuller
bluntly also addressed her male readers about this issue—"Ye cannot believe it,
men; but the only reason why women ever assume what is more appropriate to you,
is because you prevent them from finding out what is fit for themselves. Were they
free, were they wise fully to develop the strength and beauty of woman, they would
never wish to be men, or manlike” (WNC 36). Indeed, Fuller spoke honestly about
her desire to celebrate the “feminine” as much as the “masculine”: “an intimate friend
of the other sex said, in a fervent moment, that I ‘deserved in some star to be a man.’

209



He was much surprised when I disclosed my view of my position and hopes, when I
declared my faith that the feminine side, the side of love, of beauty, of holiness, was
now to have its full chance” (WNC 22).
As Reynolds writes, Fuller was not an activist, she was a reformer (“Fern” 66).
In a society which weaponised adjectives such as “sentimental” and “womanly,”
Fuller attempted to reevaluate womanhood in writing. Rather than rejecting it, she
sought to celebrate the body: Davis notes that “Like Emerson and Thoreau, Fuller
sought to defy the reductive equating of identity and physicality, but her efforts were
aimed not only at idealistically reconfiguring the physical to unveil its hidden lessons
in metaphysics but also at accomplishing the reverse” (“Body” 49). Fuller had a
somewhat dual relation with the human body, which was informed by her experience
as a woman in nineteenth-century America: unlike her male counterparts, she did not
simply emphasise the importance of the spirit, but she also argued in favor of a
positive reevaluation of the female body. In fact, although she wanted women to be
considered as “souls” (a consideration which implied they were equal to men), she
also celebrated the body as a site for spiritual discovery: “The body thus emerges
not as the physiological site of gender but as the physical source of metaphysical
insights into the intersections between nature and soul, suffering and transcendence”
(Davis, “Body” 45). This dual, spiritual and embodied, positive vision of womanhood
differs from Emerson’s vision of the body and of the female body more specifically.
In Memoirs, womanhood is not at all celebrated as “transcendence” but,
rather, it is used to portray Fuller as vulnerable, in the throes of her emotions and
imagination. Emerson’s depiction of Fuller reproduces the “common male assertion
was that women were naturally emotional beings and that only men possessed the
reason and restraint necessary to succeed outside the home” (Reynolds, “Fern” 65).

210



The body is not perceived positively, and this is particularly evident in how Emerson
addresses Fuller’s interest in mesmerism, but also in how he writes about sentiment
and sensuality.
B) Emerson’s Distrust of the Body and the Bodily
In a New Yorker article entitled “Ecstasy of Influence,” Dan Chiasson comments on
Emerson’s poetry of grief, writing that “Emerson was not the poet he had in mind in
‘The Poet.’” Similarly, I argue that in Memoirs Emerson was not the women’s rights
supporter he had in mind in his lecture “Woman” (1855). In the posthumous
biography, despite his best efforts to memorialise her, Emerson was very judgmental
about Fuller. Throughout the biography, he disapproved of her spirituality, ignored
her feminism, and criticised her writing. Dismissing Fuller’s belief in the supernatural
by stating that she was governed by the “meteors of her fancy” (MMFO 1:280),
Emerson’s rejected Fuller’s faith in the power of intuition, her attempts to cure the
body through alternative practices, and her general interest in gems and symbols in
the sections “Arcana,” “Dæmonology” and “Ecstasy.”
As Robert Milder notes, “On the issues of gender, race, and class that have
become indices of political definition, Emerson was a hesitant or tardy reformer at
best.” 29 Milder argues that while “acknowledging that true genius is androgynous,
[Emerson] was disabled by his own personal and vocational anxieties about
manliness from doing justice to the nascent feminist movement.” Evaluating
Emerson’s radicalism, he convincingly identifies a three-fold problem. First, Milder
states that “Emerson has been called many things, but except by theological
stalwarts outraged by the Divinity School Address, ‘radical’ has seldom been one of

29 For a similar reflection, see Gougeon on Emerson’s 1844 “Emancipation Address.”

211



them” (49). Secondly, he writes about the challenge posed by presentism: “To speak
of a ‘radical’ Emerson is necessarily to speak of a historical Emerson. In the fullest
sense, this means crediting Emerson with the complex social being we implicitly
claim for ourselves as figures enmeshed in history and deeply constructed by it” (49).
Thirdly, Milder points out that it is almost impossible to pin Emerson’s thinking down
as it evolved throughout the years: “even within the period 1836-1844, Emerson's
Transcendental heyday, there is no univocal or settled ‘Emerson’ any more than
there is a univocal or settled ‘America.’” Milder eventually concludes that Emerson’s
radicalism is to be found “elsewhere”—“The chief reference point for Emerson's
radicalism is not gender, race, or class but his relationship to a phenomenon that . . .
impressed contemporary observers for better or worse as the leading characteristic
of the age: the emergence of the individual.” Although he focused on the “individual”
regardless of gender, Emerson’s image of womanhood (the one which emerges from
his depiction of Fuller in Memoirs) was still in many ways informed by True
Womanhood, in its emphasis on woman’s physical appearance, on her morality and
self-sacrifice. In the biography, Emerson was unable to sympathise with Fuller’s
experience as a woman and bluntly rejected a number of her beliefs, including her
interest in “Dæmonology.”
While narrating Fuller’s life, Emerson indeed struggled with a particular phase
of her individual growth: two years after Fuller’s death, he still had difficulty accepting
the spiritual awakening that Fuller underwent in 1840, which Steele calls her
“intellectual coming of age.” Many times in his chapter “Visits to Concord,” Emerson
refers to 1840 as a year marked by change: “I have alluded to the fact, that, in the
summer of 1840, Margaret underwent some change in the tone and the direction of
her thoughts, to which she attributed a high importance” (1:308); “I have already

212



intimated, in the summer and autumn of 1840, she had retreated to some interior
shrine, and believed that she came into life and society with some advantage from
this devotion” (MMFO 1:338). Emerson’s repeated use of the indefinite adjective
“some”—“some change in the tone and the direction of her thoughts,” “some interior
shrine,” “some advantage from this devotion”—shows his confusion over Fuller’s
new interests. The vagueness with which Emerson refers to these “change[s]” also
suggests a distance and refusal to fully accept them.
Emerson communicated his struggle to accept this new Fuller directly to her:
in a letter written in December 1840, he explained, “I once fancied your nature &
aims so eccentric that I had a foreboding that certain crises must impend in your
history that would be painful to me to witness in the conviction that I could not aid
even by sympathy” (EL 2:360). In the section “Ecstasy” of Memoirs, Emerson
commented a posteriori, “I observed . . . a certain pathos of sentiment, and a march
of character, threatening to arrive presently at the shores and plunge into the sea of
Buddhism and mystical trances” (MMFO 1:308). Back in 1840, Emerson had tried to
understand what Fuller’s new beliefs were: in August of that year, he had asked her,
“how is it that you can leave me in this ignorance, with such a will on your part to
teach & on my part to learn?” (EL 2:328). In Memoirs, he explains that “in this year,
1840, in which events occurred which combined great happiness and pain for her
affections, she remained for some time in a sort of ecstatic solitude” (1:308). His
skepticism about those changes is evident—“[s]he made many attempts to describe
her frame of mind to me, but did not inspire me with confidence that she had now
come to any experiences that were profound or permanent” (MMFO 1:308).
In December 1839, Fuller had tried to explain those changes to Emerson
although she was, clearly, afraid of his criticism,

213



If you could look into my mind just now, you would send far from you those who
love and hate. I am on the Drachenfels, and cannot get off; it is one of my
naughtiest moods. Last Sunday, I wrote a long letter, describing it in prose and
verse, and I had twenty minds to send it you as a literary curiosity; then I
thought, this might destroy relations, and I might not be able to be calm and
chip marble with you any more, if I talked to you in magnetism and music; so I
sealed and sent it in the due direction. (FL 2:104)
Fuller, as her 1844 comments about Miss Parsons reveal, became quickly aware
that Emerson did not understand the new type of spirituality she had become
interested in: in February 1840, in a letter that Emerson reported in Memoirs, she
complained, “Gentle Sanscrit I cannot write. My Persian and Arabic you love not.
Why do I write thus to one who must ever regard the deepest tones of my nature as
those of childish fancy or worldly discontent?” (MMFO 1:291).
At the beginning of her 1840 Conversations series, she even informed her students
about “the great changes in [her] mind”—
Sunday, Nov. 8th, 1840. -On Wednesday I opened with my class. It was a noble
meeting. I told the great changes in my mind, and that I could not be sure they
would be satisfied with me now, as they were when I was in deliberate
possession of myself. I tried to convey the truth, and though I did not arrive at
any full expression of it, they all, with glistening eyes, seemed melted into one
love. Our relation is now perfectly true. (MMFO 1:339)
In Memoirs, Emerson cathartically addressed the misunderstanding: “She was vexed
at the want of sympathy on my part, and I again felt that this craving for sympathy did
not prove the inspiration” (MMFO 308-309). However, instead of sympathizing with
Fuller in Memoirs, he remained critical, showing the limits of that catharsis.

214



After their 1840 rift, Fuller became more and more aware and accustomed to
the limits of Emerson’s understanding—“Mr. E. scarce knows the instincts. And uses
them rather for rejection than reception when he uses them at all” (FL 2:161n1).
Although her writings show that she eventually came to terms with Emerson’s
coldness and that she accepted him as a friend despite their differences, Memoirs
reveals that those differences were very much intact until 1852. While “[u]nder ideal
conditions, the body for Emerson is another ‘natural’ manifestation of the soul”
(Davis, “Body” 32), Emerson was always distrustful of the faith that Fuller put in
body-based spirituality. A refusal to celebrate the body and the bodily therefore
pervades Emerson’s writing in Memoirs. Davis provides an interesting explanation to
such dislike, stating that “No doubt the untimely deaths of many of those he loved,
especially the tragic loss of his only son Waldo at the age of five, deepened his
disdain for a body that was foreign to man's soul yet utterly necessary to his
existence” (Douglas, “Body” 32). As Fuller wrote in a letter in December 1844, “you .
. . need to be careful of your health. It is so very unnatural to guard against harm; yet
it is a pity to let the body become a clog, instead of a plaint vestment and organ to
the spirit” (FL 3:251).

II – On Fuller’s Dæmonology
A) Of Gems, the Sistrum, and Flowers: Emerson and Channing on Fuller
In Memoirs, Emerson’s sections “Arcana”, “Dæmonology,” and “Ecstasy” are all
three concerned with Fuller’s mysticism—let us first see how each word is defined
and what that entails. The word “Arcana,” the title of the first section of Emerson’s
chapter “Visits to Concord,” denotes a “mysterious or specialized knowledge,
language, or information accessible or possessed only by the initiate” (Webster).

215



Fuller’s mysticism certainly looked “mysterious” to the authors of Memoirs, who did
not share nor really understand her interest in “dæmonology”—a term which Fuller
defined as follows:
As to the Daemoniacal, I know not that I can say to you anything more precise
than you find from Goethe. There are no precise terms for such thoughts. . . .
We speak of a mystery, a dread; we shudder, but we approach still nearer, and
a part of our nature listens, sometimes answers to this influence, which, if not
indestructible, is at least indissolubly linked with the existence of matter.
(MMFO 1:225)
Describing a sort of “influence” (which etymologically denotes something that flows,
like a dialogue between “matter” and spirit), Fuller admitted that she was herself
drawn by a force to which one “listens” and “sometimes answers.” Indeed, Fuller
depicts a sort of attraction (“we approach still nearer”) that pulls the individual (“our
nature”) in one direction, and that is “indissolubly linked with the existence of matter.”
It might also be useful to briefly focus on the word “ecstasy,” which held a very
different meaning for Fuller and for Emerson. As Manson pinpoints, the term
“Ecstatica” “appears in ‘The Great Lawsuit. Man versus Men: Woman versus
Women,’ in which Fuller argues for the capabilities of woman, as does ecstasy in
‘Leila,’ in which she describes a mystical experience. Ecstasy commonly refers to a
mystical, enraptured trance state” (299). Robert D. Richardson writes that, on the
other hand, ecstasy “does not mean a technical out-of-body experience” for Emerson
“but a joyous consciousness of the rich plenitude of existence” (“Nature” 104).
Emerson’s description of Fuller’s mysticism in Memoirs is characterised by a
certain distance he keeps, as narrator, from her, his subject: viewed as an object of
study, she is literarily dissected, “I have separated and distributed as I could some of

216



the parts which blended in the rich composite energy which Margaret exerted during
the ten years over which my occasional interviews with her were scattered” (MMFO
1:311). Channing too writes about Fuller in a similar fashion: “it was quite instructive
to watch the moods of a mind so sensitive as Margaret's” (MMFO 2:92). The adverb
and adjective “so sensitive” bring once again into the picture a sort of overemotionality generally associated with women and used to justify gender
discrimination—“The emotive force in her, indeed, was immense in volume, and
most various in tendency; and it was wonderful to observe the outward equability of
one inwardly so impassioned” (MMFO 2:92). The expressions “impassioned” and
“emotive force,” as well as the exaggerations “immense in volume,” “most various in
tendency,” “so impassioned,” all point to Fuller’s (womanly) emotionality, and make
her seem volatile and impressionable.
Like Emerson, Channing also writes about Fuller as of an object of study—
“The more one studied her,” “I was chiefly interested in the processes whereby she
was gaining harmony and unity,” “gaining real knowledge of her commanding
character” (MMFO 2:92). He also comments on Fuller’s spirituality, but his tone
differs from Emerson’s: it is much more exaggerated and filled with compliments,
while Emerson is more sober and critical. In “The Woman” (a sub-section of
Channing’s first chapter, “Jamaica Plain”), Channing speaks of Fuller’s sudden
change: “In 1839 I had met Margaret upon the plane of intellect. In the summer of
1840, on my return from the West, she was to be revealed in a new aspect” (MMFO
2:31). He then explains the nature of that “new aspect”: “There were gems, too, and
medallions and seals, to be examined, each enigmatical, and each blended by
remembrances with some fair hour of her past life” (MMFO 2:32). The adjective

217



“enigmatical” and the verb phrase “to be examined” both create a distance between
Channing and Fuller, suggesting that he, too, struggled to understand her mysticism.
In his sections, Channing tries to explain Fuller’s spirituality in quite
mechanical terms, justifying it as a way she found to channel a certain excess of
emotions, of imaginative faculties: “In the world of imagination, she had discharged
the stormful energy which would have been destructive in actual life. And in thought
she had bound herself to the mast while sailing past the Sirens” (MMFO 2:93).
Channing’s reference to a deleterious “stormful energy” could be interpreted as a
timid, Victorian hint at a possible repressed sexual desire. Channing then continues
to explain Fuller’s mysticism as the effect (the “result”) of a cause (“prisoned
emotions”): “The result was, that at this period Margaret had become a Mystic. Her
prisoned emotions found the freedom they pined for in contemplation of nature's
exquisite harmonies,-in poetic regards of the glory that enspheres human existence,
when seen as a whole from beyond the clouds, -and above all in exultant
consciousness of life ever influent from the All-Living” (MMFO 2:94). Sexuality, or at
least hints at it, then reappears in Channing’s remarks, “Filled thus as Margaret was
with ecstasy, she was yet more than willing, -even glad, -to bear her share in the
universal sorrow. Well she knew that pain must be proportioned to the fineness and
fervor of her organization; that the very keenness of her sensibility exposed her to
constant disappointment or disgust” (MMFO 2:124). In this passage, Fuller’s
“sensibility,” presented as a feminine bodily constitution, is what exposes her to
danger (“constant disappointment”).
Emerson does not try to explain Fuller’s mysticism in “mechanical” terms like
Channing, but openly admits that he struggles to understand that part of her life.
What Emerson does, however, is to quote repeatedly from Fuller’s mystic writings in

218



Memoirs right after stating his disapproval of such beliefs. Commenting on such odd
juxtaposition, Zwarg notes that she sees in Emerson, or more specifically in his
philo-feminist alter-ego “Waldo,” the desire to learn from Fuller—“This exorbitant
pattern repeats itself throughout the text, indicating that Fuller's resistances to
Waldo's way of knowing are virtues that Emerson absorbs and structures into the
pattern of his work from ‘Nature’ to ‘Fate’” (Feminist 251). I argue against such claim:
I believe that in addition to not understanding Fuller’s beliefs, Emerson also used
them to question her credibility as a Transcendentalist thinker. At the beginning of
“Arcana,” he explains,
It was soon evident that there was somewhat a little pagan about her; that she
had some faith more or less distinct in a fate, and in a guardian genius; that her
fancy, or her pride, had played with her religion. She had a taste for gems,
ciphers, talismans, omens, coincidences, and birth-days. She had a special
love for the planet Jupiter, and a belief that the month of September was
inauspicious to her. She never forgot that her name, Margarita, signified a
pearl. (MMFO 1:219)
Here the word “pagan”, the vagueness conveyed through the pronoun “somewhat,”
and the use of the indefinite “some” all translate a sense of skepticism and
misunderstanding. Emerson repeats himself quite a lot in these pages: if on page
219, he writes about Fuller’s “taste for gems, ciphers, talismans, omens,
coincidences, and birth-days” he repeats the almost exact same words on the next
page, noting how “[c]oincidences, good and bad, contretemps, seals, ciphers,
mottoes, omens, anniversaries, names, dreams, are all of a certain importance to
her” (MMFO 1:220).

219



As pointed out by Zwarg, Emerson’s sections are characterised by a very odd
juxtaposition: on the one hand, he comments on Fuller’s beliefs with skepticism and
distance and, on the other, quotes parts of her writing and admits to disappointing
her in friendship. Describing her taste for gems, Emerson explains why she “chose
carbuncle for her own stone”: “She valued what she had somewhere read, that
carbuncles are male and female. The female casts out light, the male has his within
himself. ‘Mine,' she said, ‘is the male.' And she was wont to put on her carbuncle, a
bracelet, or some selected gem, to write letters to certain friends” (MMFO 1:219). For
Fuller, carbuncle was indeed a talisman: as evident from the passage quoted in
Memoirs, it embodied that union of the male and the female. Unfortunately, Emerson
did not go as far as quoting from Woman in the Nineteenth Century. In Woman,
Leila—one of Fuller’s many fictional doubles—is associated with the red carbuncle: “I
find her always to have retreated into the secret veins of earth. Then glows through
her whole being the fire that so baffles men, as she walks on the surface of earth;
the blood-red, heart’s blood-red of the carbuncle” (WNC 170). This fascinating
passage from Woman celebrates Leila’s power, symbolized by the carbuncle’s red
color, and describes the triumph of her force over the “baffle[d] men.” For Fuller,
although gender is present in that reinstatement of woman’s force, Leila’s power
transcends gender and is of a universal nature:
She is, like it, her own light, and beats with the universal heart, with no care
except to circulate as the vital fluid; it would seem waste then for her to rise to
the surface. There in these secret veins of earth she thinks herself into fine
gold, or aspires for her purest self, till she interlaces the soil with veins of silver.
She knows that fires are preparing on upper earth to temper this sternness of
her silent self. (WNC 170)

220



Fuller admires Leila’s “vital fluid,” which is not marked by her sex, but is a force that
transcends all distinctions. However, Fuller also knows that while that “light” shines
within “these secret veins of earth,” it is endangered by “ris[ing] to the surface” where
“fires are preparing on upper earth to temper this sternness of her silent self” (WNC
170). That passage—especially its conclusion, “temper this sternness of her silent
self”—is particularly striking when read alongside Memoirs; for one could argue that
that is precisely what its three authors did, they tempered the sternness of Fuller’s
silent self.
In her correspondence with Emerson, Fuller did not temper her beliefs; she
shared them with him, knowing well that he would receive them with skepticism. She
insisted, “My flowers and stones however shabby interest me, because they stand
for a great deal to me, and would, I feel, have a hieroglyphical interest for those of
like nature with me” (FL 3:309). Although this passage does not appear in Memoirs,
Emerson briefly alludes to it, recounting how Fuller “valued, of course, the
significance of flowers, and chose emblems for her friends from her garden” (MMFO
1:221). In that same letter, written by Fuller on July 13 th, 1844, she added two
illustrations of her emblems: one was a “Double Triangle, Serpent and Rays,”30 and
the other was a drawing of a sistrum, a symbol that was very special to her. To this
too, Emerson alludes in Memoirs: “She chose the Sistrum for her emblem, and had it
carefully drawn with a view to its being engraved on a gem. And I know not how
many verses and legends came recommended to her by this symbolism” (MMFO
1:221). The sistrum, a musical instrument (made of wood, metal or clay) used in
ancient Egypt and also throughout the Roman Empire and associated with the cult of

30 This illustration was used, slightly altered, as frontispiece for the first edition of

Woman (WNC 195n9).
221



the goddess Isis, was a symbol linked to maternity, dance, joy and sexuality. Fuller
drew a very close reproduction of the real instrument, but, unlike the other illustration
she included in her letter to Emerson, that one was not included in Woman. The
sistrum did, nevertheless, end up being mentioned in Memoirs, amidst Emerson’s
sceptical remarks about Fuller’s mysticism.

.

(Fig. 15) “Fuller’s drawing, included in her 13 July [1844] letter to Emerson (FL 3:309).” Letter to
Ralph Waldo Emerson; The Parsonage, no year July 13. Margaret Fuller family papers, MS Am 1086,
(9), Page 109., Box: 8. Houghton Library. https://id.lib.harvard.edu/ead/c/hou01535c01563/catalog
Accessed January 06, 2023.

(Fig. 16) “Sistrum of the Chantress Tapenuca. 1186–600 BC.” Met Museum, New York),
www.metmuseum.org/art/collection/search/553814

222



B) “Dæmonology”: Emerson’s Lecture and Memoirs
Commenting on Fuller’s “Two Herberts,” a work published in March 1844 and
devoted to Lord Herbert of Cherbury and his younger brother George, Robin Grey
states that “[b]y employing in ‘The Two Herberts’ the genre of a Landorlike imaginary
conversation, Fuller is able to acknowledge resemblance yet emphasize the polarity
between Emerson and herself in the guise of the two brothers” (89). In The
Complicity of Imagination, Grey argues that Fuller compared her relationship with
Emerson to that of the “Two Herberts,” viewing herself as more similar to Lord
Herbert, and liking Emerson to his younger brother George: Fuller, Grey explains,
“chooses to acknowledge the Lord Herbert within herself while distancing herself
from George Herbert — the devotional poet most often characterised as ‘the
supplicant’ - instead relegating Emerson to that role” (91). Grey pinpoints that
“Fuller’s Lord Herbert argues implicitly for self-enabling access to truth, insisting that
as long as no one is excluded, there are many ways to truth, even the miraculous”
(104). Fuller refers to Lord Herbert as the “spiritual man of the world” who is “able to
comprehend all things”: she insists on the all-encompassing nature of his wisdom
right from the very first pages of her essay, in which she declares that the world does
not need “a saint, martyr, sage, poet, artist, preacher, or any other whose vocations
leads to a seclusion and partial use of faculty” (Papers 18). Certainly, Fuller was
much more open to the “miraculous” than Emerson was.
The opening of Emerson’s section “Dæmonology” in Memoirs (MMFO 1:221226), characterised by general, third-person comments, is reminiscent of his 1839
lecture “Dæmonology”: in Memoirs, rather than directly speaking about Fuller, he
writes, “This catching at straws of coincidence, where all is geometrical, seems the
necessity of certain natures” (MMFO 1:221). Maintaining a distance from his

223



deceased friend, whom he refers to indirectly as “certain natures,” Emerson explains
mysticism as something inevitable, which is a “necessity” for some. In the next page,
his words already shift from observation to judgement: writing in the third-person
singular, and talking about “a man,” Emerson condemns those who “to infer
Providence, because a man happens to find a shilling on the pavement just when he
wants one to spend, is puerile, and much as if each of us should date his letters and
notes of hand from his own birthday, instead of from Christ's or the king's reign, or
the current Congress” (MMFO 1:222). Similarly, in his lecture on “Dæmonology,”
Emerson addresses the “lovers of marvels, of what we call the occult and unproved
sciences, of mesmerism, of astrology, of coincidences, of intercourse, by writing or
by rapping or by painting, with departed spirits,” to whom he asked “not [to] reproach
us with incredulity because we are slow to accept their statement. It is not the
incredibility of fact, but a certain want of harmony between the action and the agents”
(Biographical 12). The use of third-person pronouns (especially the contrast between
“them”—the “lovers of marvels”— and “us” or “me”), the expression “slow to accept
their statement,” all recall the way in which Emerson also used to distance himself
from Fuller in Memoirs. In Emerson’s letter to Sturgis quoted above, Emerson would
express in quasi-identical terms his misunderstanding of such practices—“I am a
slow scholar at magnetism.”
As their very name suggests, memoirs are representations of memory, not of
history. Memoirs of Margaret Fuller Ossoli is in that regard no exception: as Zwarg
and Hanlon have both demonstrated, the biography redraws—in addition to Fuller’s
life—the psychological journey of Emerson’s remembrance of Fuller. It is a highly
subjective, mediated and personal text. However, it is also problematic because,
through the abundant quoting of Fuller (and despite the mishandling of her writing)

224



the biography claims a certain objectivity to which it does not comply. The way in
which Emerson writes about Fuller’s interest in mysticism consists in an alternation
between “memoirist” and “biographer.” In some respects, he describes Fuller’s
interest with a distant objectivity: the third-person singular, the impersonal structures
create the effect of a photographic lens which does not distort, but renders as
faithfully as possible, the original image— “It will be seen, however, that this
propensity Margaret held with certain tenets of fate, which always swayed her, and
which Goethe, who had found room and fine names for all this in his system, had
encouraged” (MMFO 1:222). As soon as Emerson starts to write in the first-person,
the neutrality of the photographic lens is gone and adverbs such as “strangely”
impart to his rendering of Fuller’s beliefs a rather disenchanted tone: “and, I may
add, which her own experiences, early and late, seemed strangely to justify” (MMFO
1:222). Emerson’s commentary of this aspect of Fuller’s life indeed cyclically retorts
back to some form of judgment. When mentioning in Memoirs Fuller’s descriptions of
dæmonology to a friend, “In another letter to an earlier friend, she expatiates a little”
(MMFO 1:224), Emerson sounds condescending.
For Emerson, continually looking for signs and forebodings equated to having
a narrow perspective on life: as he wrote in 1839, “The whole world is an omen and
a sign. Why look so wistfully in a corner?” (Biographical 28). Although he recognised
that many were attracted by mesmerism, Emerson concluded his 1839 lecture by
reinstating his skepticism of such practices and reaffirming the power of Nature,
Willingly I too say, Hail! to the unknown awful powers which transcend the
ken of the understanding. And the attraction which this topic has had for me
and which induces me to unfold its parts before you is precisely because I
think the numberless forms in which this superstition has reappeared in

225



every time an every people indicates the inextinguishableness of wonder in
man; betrays his conviction that behind all your explanations is a vast and
potent and living Nature, inexhaustible and sublime, which you cannot
explain. (Biographical 27)
As Manson remarks, “in 1839 [Emerson] spoke out against the materiality of
mesmerism” (301): for him, “physical and metaphysical insights belonged to
separate spheres” (302). Manson further explains that “Emerson continued to assert
the division between the spirit and the body, arguing for meditative states in which
the spirit transcends bodily concerns or impediments” (Manson 302). Indeed, in
1852, Emerson was still unwilling to accept this part of Fuller’s life.
When expressing his distaste for Fuller’s mysticism, Emerson also made a
number of generalisations on women, whom he described as all somewhat
obfuscated in their capacity to judge: “In our noble Margaret her personal feeling
colours all her judgements of persons, of books, of pictures, & of the laws of the
world. This is easily felt in common women & a large deduction is civilly made on the
spot, by whosoever replies to their remark” (EJ 4:293). Here, Emerson distinguished
between “common women” and Margaret: the two were different in his eyes, as
shown by the use of the conjunction “but”—“But when the speaker has such brilliant
talent & literature as Margaret, she gives so many fine names to these merely
sensuous & subjective objects, that the hearer is long imposed upon, and thinks so
precise & glittering nomenclature cannot be of mere muscae voliantes but must be of
some real ornithology hitherto unknown to him” (EJ 4:293-294). The “merely
sensuous & subjective objects” were to Emerson the symbols of a physicality which
he rejected as less important, because far from the universal and the ideal, and
which he associated with “women.” However, in the presence of Fuller’s genius

226



(“brilliant talent & literature,” “so many fine names”), who somehow cast a spell on
him (“glittering”), Emerson had started to believe that those “mere muscae voliantes”
were “some real ornithology hitherto unknown to him.” The metaphor of the spell also
shows, however, how ephemerous these episodes were for him. Quickly, Emerson
returned to his former opinions: as Hanlon explains, “very regrettably to Emerson—
that tendency to surrender judgment to feeling produced in [Fuller] a ‘florid’ prose
style, surfeits of discursive warmth” (61).

Emerson’s commentary of Fuller’s mysticism in Memoirs reveals the
conflicted attitude he held towards the body, which he both rejected as an
impediment to (Fuller’s) intellect and insisted upon as a defining characteristic of
woman. This attitude is in marked contrast to Fuller’s views: as Manson writes,
“[w]hereas Emerson saw the body as a mere vessel to the spirit, Fuller saw potential
harmony and correspondence between the body and the spirit” (302). The relation
between body and spirit was often the object of debate among Transcendentalist
circles; in her 1843 Dial essay “What is Beauty?”, Lydia Maria Child celebrated the
possibility of sensory accessions—“Beauty is felt not seen by the understanding.
Mere analysis never attains so high. It can dissect, but it cannot create beauty, or
perceive it; because it is thought standing alone, and therefore in selfconsciousness. A primal note is wanting, and its tune is ever defective. A primal
color is gone, and its painting is deficient.” In viewing Beauty as something which
one “feels” rather than “seeing,” Child sided with Fuller’s views of the relationship
between body and intellect. The combination of the two is, however, what Emerson
criticised in Memoirs, in which he deplored that in “our noble Margaret, her personal
feeling colors all her judgment” (MMFO 1:279).

227



3.3 After Memoirs: The Sinusoid Trajectory of Emerson’s
Involvement in the Women’s Rights Movement
Emerson on “Woman”: A Chronology
1850

Paulina Wright Davis invites Emerson to attend the Woman's Rights
Convention to be held in Worcester, Massachusetts. He declines but
authorizes her “to use [his] name as one of the inviters of the
convention” (EL 4: 230).

1851

Lucy Stone invites Emerson to attend another convention for
women's rights, also to be held in Worcester. He declines.

1852

Memoirs of Margaret Fuller Ossoli is published in the United States
(2 vols.) and in the United Kingdom (3 vols.).

1853

Wendell Phillips asks Emerson’s permission to use his name on a
printed circular designed to secure signers for a petition to be laid
before the constitutional convention. Emerson declines Phillips’s
request.

1855

Emerson reads “Woman” before the Woman’s Rights Convention on
September 20th, at the Meionaon Hall in Boston.

1860

Emerson repeats the same lecture before the 28 th Congregational
Society at the Music Hall in Boston.

[after 1865]

“Discours Manqué,” never read.

1869

Emerson gives a lecture for the New-England Woman’s Suffrage
Association anniversary on May 26th, at Tremont Temple in Boston.
He is elected Vice President of the group at the meeting.

1881

“Mr. Emerson on Woman Suffrage” (1862) is published in the
Woman’s Journal (March 26th).
In Woman, Fuller stated decidedly “if you ask me what offices [women] may

fill; I reply—any. I do not care what case you put; let them be sea-captains if you will”
(WNC 102). Written in 1845, this passage was—as much then as it is now—among
the most quoted from Fuller’s book. In fact, Greeley recounted to the authors of
Memoirs that he would often quote it to Margaret herself: “Whenever she said or did
anything implying the usual demand of Woman on the courtesy and protection of
228



Manhood, I was apt, before complying, to look her in the face and exclaim with
marked emphasis, - quoting from her ‘Woman in the Nineteenth Century,' -'LET
THEM BE SEA-CAPTAINS IF THEY WILL!' Of course, this was given and received as

raillery, but it did not tend to ripen our intimacy or quicken my esteem into
admiration” (MMFO 2:156).31
Ten years after the publication of Woman in the Nineteenth Century, Emerson
made a more or less direct allusion to Fuller’s famous words as he stated, in his
1855 lecture on “Woman”, “Let good women sail in the ship, the manners at once are
altered and mended” (2:18), “She is to civilize the voting as she has the sailors” (LL
2:19). Twenty years after Woman, he again referred to Fuller’s famous lines in his
“Discours Manqué,” in which he wrote, “Let good women go passengers in the ship,
and the manners at once are mended” (LL 2:17). While women were exhorted to be
all they wanted in Fuller’s work, Emerson’s lecture quite literally put them in the
passenger seat. He presented feminine influence as something positively
regenerative (“civilize,” “mended”) but insisted on the image of woman as passenger,
who sails “in the ship” rather than “who sails the ship.” As shown by these examples,
Emerson’s stance on women’s rights differed from Fuller’s although his thinking was
influenced by her.
In the eighth chapter of Feminist Conversations, entitled “Emerson's Scene
before the Women: Memoirs of Margaret Fuller Ossoli and ‘Woman,’” Zwarg
establishes a continuity between three works by Emerson that she believes were all
about Fuller: first, she mentions Memoirs, which, she observes, was written “to quell

31James

Parton, author of The Life of Horace Greeley (1869), included this
commentary in his biography, noting, “Mr. Greeley has written a singularly interesting
account of the rise and progress of his friendship with Margaret Fuller, which was
published, a few years ago, in her fascinating memoirs. A man is, in a degree, that
which he loves to praise” (255-256).
229



the tide of gossip about her,” then Zwarg notes Emerson’s “attempt to deal with
Fuller's loss in ‘Woman,’ a lecture he gave before the Boston Woman's Rights
Convention in 1855,” and thirdly she cites the essay “Fate” which he wrote
“simultaneously with his work on Memoirs, only to publish it years later in The
Conduct of Life (1860)” (239). Commenting on “Woman,” Zwarg writes: “Emerson
shows that he is less interested (though by no means uninterested) in clearing the
route to equality between men and women than in finding the positive, rather than
this negative, source of their difference” (Feminist 261). An analysis of Emerson’s
characterisations of Fuller in Memoirs and in other texts shows that the qualities he
was eager to associate to womanhood were not as positive as Zwarg suggests.
While Zwarg focuses specifically on his 1855 famous address, “Woman” was
not Emerson’s only lecture on the subject. On May 26th, 1869, he spoke in support of
women’s rights at the New-England Woman’s Suffrage Association.32 That speech
bears great resemblance to an earlier text that Emerson wrote sometimes after
1865,33 a text called “Discours Manqué” and which Emerson “never read” (in
“Emerson and the Woman Question,” Gougeon identifies the “Discours Manqué” as
the basis for the 1869 lecture). In 1881, the Woman’s Journal published a piece
entitled “Mr. Emerson on Woman Suffrage” which had apparently been written in

See Gougeon, “Emerson and the Woman Question: The Evolution of His Thought,”
for a transcription of the lecture. It was originally printed in the Boston Post, on May
28th, 1869: “The Boston Post gives the subjoined report of Mr. Ralph Waldo Emerson’s
remarks at the anniversary meeting of the New-England Women’s Suffrage
Association in that city on Wednesday”
33 It “must have been written in part after 3 March 1865, when the Freedman’s Bureau
was established by Congress. Moreover, it bears a strong resemblance to the address
that is summarized in the 27 May 1869 Boston Post, although there are enough
variations to make it clear that this is not the exact address that Emerson read on the
occasion” (Later Lectures 2:18).
32

230



1862,34 and which proposed again the content of his 1855 lecture. So, ultimately,
Emerson gave two lectures (in 1855 and in 1869), of which he also produced two
slightly shorter versions (respectively, in 1862 and in 1865).
Not only are Emerson’s public statements on women’s rights not numerous,
but they were first preceded by a series of rejections—instances in which Emerson
declined to take part in certain initiatives after having been approached to support
the nascent movement (as noted in Chapter One, he rejected invitations from
Paulina Wright Davis, Lucy Stone, and Wendell Phillips). When the New-York Daily
Tribune35 reported on the 1851 Worcester Woman’s Rights Convention, which had
taken place on October 15th, it included the letters of those who had been invited but
who did not participate, such as Harriet Martineau, Henry Ward Beecher, Horace
Mann, and of course, Emerson. Some invitees were more conservative than others
in their reply to Stone. For instance, Mann wrote that “for the present, at least, I think
it better that I should labor in my sphere and you in yours.” A few years later, in
1853, Mann would publish A Few Thoughts on the Powers and Duties of Woman:
Two Lectures: as he explained to Stone in 1851, “I am just completing a Lecture
whose subject is ‘Woman’ and which is designed as a companion to my ‘Few
Thoughts for Young Men.’ Should it ever be published, I hope there are some things
in it which you would not disapprove.” In the lecture, Mann denounced society’s
oppression—“The respect and deference paid to woman in what calls itself
fashionable society is degrading rather than elevating”—but he nevertheless
remained trapped in highly conservative language (“Between the sexes, then, I hold

34 “In 1862 there was a proposition to establish a Woman Suffrage paper in this city.

Several articles were contributed for it, but the idea was not carried out, and the papers
remained unpublished. The following from Ralph Waldo Emerson is characteristic and
as valuable now as then.”
35 October 17, 1851.
231



there are innate and connate distinctions, which nature never loses sight of, unless
occasionally in the production of a monster or a lusus. They are not alike, but there is
a mutuality of superiority”). In Emerson’s case, he told Stone that he could not attend
the convention because he was working on Memoirs and added “I am by no means
sure that I should find any message worth bringing to you if I were free” (7). This
differed from what he had stated in his reply to Davis’s invitation in September of the
previous year, written before he had begun Memoirs, “I . . . shall regret that it is not
rather a private meeting of thoughtful persons sincerely interested, instead of what a
public meeting is pretty sure to be a heartless noise which we are all ashamed of
when it is over” (EL 4: 230). Among those who attended the 1851 convention was
Emerson’s co-author William Henry Channing, who acted as Vice President, along
with Angelina Grimké and Lucretia Mott. Anna Parsons—Fuller and Sturgis’ trusted
mystic—was one of the Secretaries that year.
Although Emerson did eventually speak publicly in support of women’s rights,
he did so hesitantly—both in terms of the number of his interventions, and of their
(not so innovative) content. While Zwarg states that Emerson’s “growing support of
the woman's movement can be said to be directly related to the composition
of Memoirs” (Feminist 257n19), I argue that his misunderstanding of Fuller’s
feminism perdured. The following analysis of his addresses shows that the same
hesitations about womanhood that transpire in Memoirs can be found in his lectures.
More specifically, I contend that it is precisely the relation between embodiment and
equality that differentiates Emerson’s plea for “mathematical justice” for women from
Fuller’s claim for the “equality of the sexes.”

232



I – Of Woman’s “Organic Office” and Society’s “Organic Impulse”: A
Comparative Study of Emerson’s Lectures on Women’s Rights
As Gougeon explains, the evolution of Emerson’s engagement with abolitionism
“shows a movement from an individualistic emphasis on personal self-culture to an
overt social engagement with the forces of evil in American society” (“Justice” 485).
Arguing against the assumption that Emerson was a pacifist in an essay titled
“Emerson’s Militant Transcendentalism,” Gougeon states that “Transcendental
idealism was never synonymous with pacifism” and that “Transcendentalists as
activist reformers were deeply concerned with social justice and the problem of
American slavery in particular” (“Justice” 506). Gougeon shows that Emerson was
actually in favor of confrontation long before the war, and lists Emerson’s numerous
interventions in support of the antislavery movement showing their rapid acceleration
after his 1844 address on the “Emancipation of the British West Indies.” While in
1845 Emerson delivered a second emancipation address, he gave another
antislavery lecture the following year and, also in 1846, “following the forcible return
from Boston to Louisiana of a fugitive slave who had stowed away on the cargo ship
Ottoman, Emerson sent a public letter of support to a committee that had been
formed to protest the rendition and to prevent a recurrence (Gougeon, “Justice” 502).
The following analysis of Emerson’s lectures on women’s rights shows that his
engagement with the movement did not coincide with such linear expansion, that it
did not grow with the same intensity throughout the years. In fact, I argue that it
almost did not grow at all. While Gougeon states, in his article on “Emerson and the
Woman Question,” that “Emerson's involvement with the women's movement,
though initiated at a later date, approximates the trajectory his experience with the
antislavery” (572), I believe that his positioning in favor of women’s rights rather

233



looks like a sinusoid: his addresses are few, they repeat themselves, alternating
between progressive and conservative visions of womanhood.
Comparing the two strands of reformism—antislavery and women’s rights—
Gougeon notes that “both began with a troubled concern, moved to a reserved
commitment, and culminated in unambiguous support” (“Woman” 572). Certainly,
Emerson supported the women’s rights movement and believed in social equality: he
saluted the movement in the conclusion of his 1855 lecture, “The new movement is a
tide shared by the spirits of men and women. You may proceed on the faith that
whatever the woman’s heart is prompted to desire, the man’s mind is similarly
prompted to accomplish” (2:29); he did so again ten years later, at the beginning of
his “Discours Manqué,” “I consider that the movement which unites us today is no
whim, but an organic impulse, a right & proper inquiry” (LL 2:16); and in his last
intervention on the subject, in 1869, he opened by saying
It seems unnecessary to add any words the statements and arguments which
you have already heard, and certainly shall do but little more than to express
my sympathy and delight in the rightness of this movement-the rightness of
this action, as it is shown by the discourses which you have just listened. . . . I
think that the action of this Society, the sentiment of this assembly, is by no
means a whim; but is an organized policy—slow, cumulative, reaching a
greater height of health and strength. (Gougeon, “Woman” 588)
Besides publicly supporting the movement throughout the years, Emerson’s visions
of womanhood remained mostly conservative and the number of his addresses in
support of the cause remained limited. In Howe’s words (which Gougeon quotes
without commentary as a conclusion to his essay “Emerson and the Woman
Question”),

234



As tenderly conservative nature as he was boldly original in thought, Mr.
Emerson would have shrunk most sensitively from any infraction of the sacred
sphere of womanhood. . . . Some of us remember the sweet naif manner in
which he did this, the sincerity and the measure with he spoke, as if urged and
restrained by a weight of conviction which called for simple and solemn
utterance. (592)
Acknowledging the limited scope of Emerson’s support for the movement
(“restrained”), Howe nevertheless praised his good intentions (“sweet naif manner”;
“sincerity”) while also recognizing the “conservative” nature of his vision.
The following analysis of Emerson’s interventions on women’s rights is based
on the 1855 and 1865 texts, i.e. on “Woman” and “Discours Manqué”—a decision
informed by the fact that both texts have been published in scholarly editions (I used
Bosco and Myerson’s Later Lectures Volume 2) and that manuscript versions of the
two addresses are also available (Houghton Library). The 1862 and 1869 texts,
respectively published in the Woman’s Journal and in the Boston Post, I used for
comparison only for I deemed that since newspaper articles are the only versions
available to us, these are also less reliable. My examination of the lectures is aimed
at analysing the evolution of Emerson’s support for the women’s rights movement
but also at identifying the methodology behind the composition of his addresses.
Written ten years after “Woman,” Emerson’s “Discours Manqué” bears great
resemblance to the 1855 lecture to the extent that I consider it a modification of that
text rather than a new, original contribution. Some passages, like the last paragraph
of the “Discours,” are indeed more or less identical to “Woman.” Below is the 1855
text,

235



I do not think it yet appears that women wish this equal share in public affairs.
But it is they, and not we that are to determine it. Let the laws be purged of
every barbarous remainder, every barbarous impediment to women. Let the
public donations for education be equally shared by them. Let them enter a
school, as freely as a church. Let them have and hold and give their property,
as men do theirs. And, in a few years, it will easily appear whether they wish a
voice in making the laws that are to govern them. If you do refuse them a vote,
you will also refuse to tax them; according to our Teutonic principle, no
representation, no tax. (LL 2:28)
Although very similar, the 1865 (ca.) text shows small changes were made to the
passage (these are underlined, below):
I do not think it yet appears that women wish this equal share in public affairs.
But it is they, and not we that are to determine it. Let the laws be purged of
every barbarous remainder, every barbarous impediment to women. Let the
public donations for education be equally shared by them. Let their interest in
each new scientific or literary foundation be equally remembered. Let them
have and hold and give their property as men do theirs. It will presently appear
whether they wish a voice in making the laws that are to govern them. If you
refuse them a vote, you will also refuse to tax them, – according to our Teutonic
principle No representation, no tax. (LL 2:18)
The manuscripts of the two lectures show that Emerson rewrote almost verbatim in
1865 (ca.) what he had written in 1855:

236



(Fig. 17) “Address at the Woman's Rights Convention, Sept. 20, 1855.” Ralph Waldo Emerson
Lectures and Sermons, MS Am 1280.193-1280.215, MS Am 1280.193-1280.214, MS Am 1280.202,
(12). Houghton Library.

(Fig. 18) “Discours manqué. Woman.” Ralph Waldo Emerson Lectures and Sermons, MS Am
1280.193-1280.215, MS Am 1280.193-1280.214, MS Am 1280.202, (13).

In other instances, passages which appear in the 1855 and in the 1865 texts
are also present in the 1869 speech. In 1855, Emerson wrote, “I suppose women
feel in relation to men as geniuses feel among energetic workers, that though
overlooked and thrust aside in the press, they outsee all these noisy masters. And
we feel overlooked,—judged,—and sentenced” (LL 2:19). The statement “we feel
overlooked,—judged,—and sentenced” implies quite a strong divide between men
and women, reinforced by the fact that Emerson is speaking in the first-person plural

237



as if speaking for all men. In the “Discours Manqué,” Emerson copies the same
passage but specifies that it is “in the presence of sensible women” that “we feel
overlooked, judged,— and sentenced”—“I suppose women feel in relation to men, as
‘tis said geniuses feel among energetic workers, that, though overlooked and thrust
aside in the press, they outsee all these noisy masters: and we, in the presence of
sensible women, feel overlooked, judged,—and sentenced” (LL 2:16). In the 1869
version, the passage is almost identical, except for the fact that this time “sensible
women” has been replaced by “the best women,” which holds a stronger moral
connotation:
I think that women feel when they in the press, as men of genius are said to do
among energetic workers,--that they see through all these efforts with finer
eyes than their noisy masters. I think that all men in the presence of the best
women feel over-looked and judged, and sometimes sentenced. They are the
educators in all our society. (Gougeon, “Woman” 589).

(Fig. 19) “Address at the Woman's Rights Convention, Sept. 20, 1855.” Ralph Waldo Emerson
Lectures and Sermons, MS Am 1280.193-1280.215, MS Am 1280.193-1280.214, MS Am 1280.202
(12). Houghton Library.

238



(Fig. 20) “Discours manqué. Woman.” Ralph Waldo Emerson Lectures and Sermons, MS Am
1280.193-1280.215, MS Am 1280.193-1280.214, MS Am 1280.202 (13).

In some cases, small variations occur from lecture to lecture according to the
historical moment during which they were written. Indeed, changes appear
depending on whether the address was written before or after the Civil War. In 1855,
Emerson states,
One truth leads in another by the hand; one right is an accession of strength to
take more. And the times are marked by the new attitude of Woman; urging, by
argument and by association, her rights of all kinds, in short, to one-half of the
world; – as the right to education, to avenues of employment, to equal rights of
property, to equal rights in marriage, to the exercise of the professions and of
suffrage. (LL 2:25)
After 1865, although Emerson’s wording is only slightly different, “Civilization is
progressive. One truth leads in another by the hand,” his tone is much more
assertive and optimistic as he continues to acknowledge the part played by women
in the abolitionist effort,

239



her activity in putting an end to Slavery, and in serving the Hospitals of the
Sanitary Commission in the war, and in the labors of the Freedman’s Bureau,
have opened her eyes to larger rights and duties. They claim now her full rights
of all kinds,—to education, to employment, to equal laws of property and equal
rights in marriage and in the exercise of the professions and of suffrage. (LL
2:17)
This passage, although abbreviated, also appears in the 1869 speech, in which
granting rights to women is presented as ineluctable progress—“The claim now
pressed by woman is a claim for nothing less than all, than her share in all. She asks
her property; she asks for her rights, for her vote; she asks for her share in
education, for her share in all the institutions of society, for her half of the whole
world; and to this she is entitled” (Gougeon, “Woman” 589).

(Fig. 21) Address at the Woman's Rights Convention, Sept. 20 1855. Ralph Waldo Emerson Lectures
and Sermons, MS Am 1280.193-1280.215, MS Am 1280.193-1280.214, MS Am 1280.202, (12).
Houghton Library.

240



(Fig. 22) “Discours manqué. Woman.” Ralph Waldo Emerson Lectures and Sermons, MS Am
1280.193-1280.215, MS Am 1280.193-1280.214, MS Am 1280.202, (13). Houghton Library.

II – Views of Womanhood
A) Of Gender and Pronouns
The previous analysis of “Woman” and “Discours Manqué” suggests that Emerson
only wrote one “original” lecture, which he then re-used in slightly different ways over
the years. In both texts, Emerson’s call for woman’s right to vote was based on the
belief of woman’s feminizing influence, a point on which he insisted both in 1855 and
in 1865: in 1855, he wrote “Woman is the power of civilization. Man is a bear in
colleges, in mines, in ships, because there are no women” (2:18), only to rephrase
this slightly ten years later, “Civilization is her work. Man is rude and bearish in
colleges, in mines, in ships, because there, is no woman” (LL 2:17). Similarly, he
stated in 1855, “woman asks for her vote. It is the remedy at the moment of need.
She is to civilize the voting as she has the sailors, the collegians, the miners” (2:19),
and in 1865, he wrote “She is to purify and civilize the voting, as she has the
schools, the hospitals, and the drawing rooms” (LL 2:17).

241



Emerson’s defence of a woman’s right to vote, against those who believed
that politics would corrupt woman’s pure nature, was based on the belief that women
possessed certain qualities which would help civilize the nation. This reasoning
derives from an essentialist vision of womanhood, which Emerson defined as
characterised by affection (maternal and romantic), and by purity and innocence: as
he declared in 1855, “The starry crown of woman is in the power of her affection and
sentiment” (LL 2:23). Years later, in “Discours Manqué,” he would again write, “The
distinctions of the mind of Woman we all recognize; their affectionate, sympathetic,
religious, and oracular nature;—their swifter and finer perception; their taste, or love
of order and beauty, influencing or creating manners” (LL 2:16). He emphasised the
differences between man and woman, attributing to the latter qualities which were
typically ascribed to the True Woman: “Their distinctive traits—grace, vivacity, and
surer moral sentiment, their self-sacrifice, their courage and endurance, have, in
every nation, found respect and admiration” (LL 2:17).
Calling it woman’s “organic office,” Emerson stated that because of their
nature “[t]he life of the affections is primary to [women], so that there is usually no
employment or career which they will not, with their own applause and that of
society, quit for a suitable marriage. And they give entirely to their affections; . . . lose
themselves eagerly in the glory of their husbands and children” (LL 2:19-20). He
repeated this point in the “Discours Manqué”: “The part which women play in
education, in the care of young, and the tuition of older children, is their organic
office in the world” (LL 2:17). This embodied vision of woman engendered two
consequences: on the one hand, it opened the way for patronizing characterizations
which insinuated women’s inferiority, in some respects, to man: “Society,
conversations, decorum, music, flowers, dances, colours, forms, are her homes and

242



attendants. . . . There is no gift of nature without some drawback; if we are here, we
cannot be there . . . So to woman this exquisite structure could not exist, without its
own penalty: More vulnerable, more infirm, more mortal than men” (2:22), “These
traits have always characterized Woman. We are a little vain of our women, as if we
had invented them” (LL 2:17).
On the other hand, it also led Emerson to believe that women would not
necessarily want to be part of the political scene, precisely because of their
“womanly” nature: “Their sequestration from affairs, and from the injury to the moral
sense which affairs only inflict, aids them” (LL 2:23). The word “sequestration” is
striking: while arguing in favor of women’s rights, Emerson also implied that the
restriction (the “sequestration”) of their rights was in some respects beneficial to
them (“aids them”). In the same lecture, Emerson also contended: “The answer that .
. . lies in the mind of well meaning persons, to the new claims, is this: that, though
their mathematical justice is not to be denied, yet the best women do not wish these
things” (LL 2:26). The expression “mathematical justice” refers to social equality, i.e.
that women should have the same basic civil rights as men. However, Emerson
simultaneously states that “the best women do not wish these things” implying that
the “best,” most moral women would not want to take part to the corrupt world of
politics. Again, he repeated, “if the laws and customs were modified in the manner
proposed, it would embarrass and pain gentle and lovely persons, with duties which
they would find irksome and distasteful” (LL 2:26).
In his lectures, Emerson did, however, recognise that women were taking a
more and more prominent role in politics: in 1855, he described how “[a]nother step
was the effect of the action of the age on the antagonism to slavery. It was easy to
enlist woman in this; it was impossible not to enlist her. . . . it has, among its other

243



effects, given woman a feeling of public duty, and an added self-respect” (LL 2:25).
He also argued against those who were opposed to the idea of women voting– “’Tis
very cheap wit that finds it so droll that a woman should vote. Educate and refine
society to the highest point; bring together cultivated society of both sexes in a
drawing room, to consult and decide by voices on a question of taste, or a question
of right,—and is there any absurdity, or any practical difficulty in obtaining their
authentic opinions?” (LL 2:26). Writing after the Civil War, in his “Discours Manqué,”
he acknowledged that women had now entered the life of the polis: speaking from a
woman’s perspective, he stated “her activity in putting an end to Slavery, and in
serving the Hospitals of the Sanitary Commission in the war, and in the labors of the
Freedman’s Bureau have opened her eyes to larger rights and duties” (LL 2:17).
Speaking for American people in general, he declared: “we have ourselves seen the
great political enterprize of our times, the abolition of Slavery in America, undertaken
by a Society whose Executive Committee was composed of men and women, and
which held together until this object was attained” (LL 2:17). After this, Emerson
concluded: “And may she well exhibit the history of that as her voucher that she is
entitled to demand power which she has shown she can use so well” (LL 2:17-18). In
1869, he would thus unequivocally ascertain, “She asks for her property; she asks
for her rights, for her vote; she asks for her share in education, for her share in all the
institutions of society, for her half of the whole world; and to this she is entitled.”
For Gougeon, this “total lack of qualification regarding women's right to full
participation in the political process” (590) shows that “Emerson's views on the
Woman Question [had] continued to liberalize following his 1855 address” (“Woman”
586). While I agree that with regards to social equality Emerson’s thinking had
certainly evolved, I argue that the lack of renewal in what he said in support of the

244



movement suggests that his conception of womanhood did not change much over
the decades.
Despite acknowledging that women should vote, and that they could play an
active part in public affairs, Emerson’s vision of “womanhood” indeed remained
rather conservative throughout the years: in 1855, after exhorting to “Let good
women sail in the ship” (LL 2:18), he expanded upon the extended metaphor of the
nautical world and stated that “Man is the will, and woman the sentiment. In this ship
of humanity, will is the rudder, and sentiment the sail. When woman affects to steer,
the rudder is only a masked sail” (LL 2:19). This passage also appears in “Discours
Manqué,” only expressed in slightly different terms: “We commonly say, Man
represents Intellect; and Woman, Love Man looks for hard truth; Woman with her
affection, for goodness and benefit” (LL 2: 16). It is interesting to note that in 1845—
ten years before Emerson’s “Woman” and twenty before his “Discours Manqué”—
Fuller mocked such distinctions: as Kerry Larson pinpoints, “If at one point Fuller
ventures the suggestion that it is ‘more native [for woman] to inspire and receive the
poem, than to create it’ (68), she elsewhere mocks the same notion: ‘Woman the
poem, man the poet! Woman the heart, man the head! Such divisions are only
important when they are never to be transcended’ (47)” (162). In his last lecture from
1869, however, Emerson’s words were much closer to Fuller’s as he stated, “We
look upon the man as the representative of intellect and the woman as the
representative of affection; but each shares the characteristics of the other, only in
the man one predominates and in the woman the other” (Gougeon, “Woman” 588).
A closer look at the evolution of Emerson’s sentences, in the 1855, 1865, and
1869 lectures, suggests that he was very uncomfortable when speaking about
gender: in particular, it is evident how he utilized personal pronouns and other

245



linguistic devices to create a distance between himself and his own remarks. If, in
1855, he stated —impersonally—“Man is the Will, woman the Sentiment. In this ship
of humanity, will is the rudder, and sentiment the sail” (2:19), in 1865 (ca.), he added
“We commonly say Man represents Intellect; and Woman, Love. Man looks for hard
truth; Woman with her affection, for goodness and benefit” (LL 2:16). “We commonly
say” then became “We look upon” in 1869— “We look upon the man as the
representative of intellect and the woman as the representative of affection”
(Gougeon, “Woman” 588). Although Emerson then seemed more open to accept
Fuller’s possibility of gender fluidity as he declared “but each shares the
characteristics of the other,” he nevertheless appeared insecure and uncomfortable
even in that last lecture, as when he added “it isn’t for me at this time, after what you
have heard, to detain you longer. I only feel the gladness with which such
representations as you have heard, such arguments as you have heard, inspire me.”
Struggling to reconcile the fact that “each shares the characteristics of the other” with
his belief in gender difference, he reinstated: “We know woman as affectionate, as
religious, as oracular, as delighting in grace and order possessed of taste.”, “They
are the educators of our society,” “Through their sympathy and quickness they are
the proper mediators between those who have knowledge and those who want it”
(Gougeon, “Woman” 588;589).
The range of personal pronouns that Emerson uses throughout his lectures is
also worth examining. Emerson often speaks in the first-person plural “we”: “we feel
overlooked,— judged,—and sentenced” (2:19), “Conversation is the last flower of
civility, and the best result which life has to offer us. . . . It is our account of
ourselves. All we have, all we can do, all we know, is brought into play, and is the
reproduction in finer form of all our havings” (LL 2:20). As shown by these two

246



examples, “we” is both used to refer to men as opposed to women (“they”) and is
more rarely employed to refer to both men and women (as in “all we know”).
Sometimes, Emerson also implicitly distances himself from others, suggesting that
what is often said by the majority (“We commonly say, Man represents Intellect; and
Woman”) is not necessarily true. Emerson also, at times, uses the first-person
pronoun “I,” as in “I share this belief” (2:19), “I need not repeat to you,—your own
solitude will suggest it,—that a masculine woman is not strong, but a lady is” (LL
2:29). But his ventures into the first-person singular are rare. More often, he relies on
general statements so as to maintain a distance between what he is saying and his
personal convictions—“It is perhaps true that” (2:20), “the general voice of mankind
has agreed that” (2:19), “There are plenty of people who believe women to be” (LL
2:25). Women are always referred to through the third-person plural pronoun “they”:
“the same mental height which their husbands attained by toil, they attain by
sympathy with their husbands,” “They are more delicate than men, and, as thus
more impressionable, they are the best index of the coming hour” (2:19), “They could
not be such excellent artists in this element of fancy, if they did not lend and give
themselves to it” (LL 2:22).
This multiplication of personal pronouns (“I”, “we”, “you”, “they”) recalls
Fuller’s conversational method in Woman in the Nineteenth Century: it is as though,
within Emerson’s lectures, multiple characters were talking about women’s rights. In
“Emerson as Mythologist,” Zwarg compellingly demonstrates how Emerson willingly
adopted Fuller’s conversational method to subvert specific discourses: “It is Fuller's
use of this radicalized conversational strategy that enables her to expose the
reification process at work in the ‘hailing’ of the culture and it is Emerson's desire,
however botched by the ‘dress’ of ‘biography,’ to show that radical critical process as

247



his” (230). I believe that is also the intention with which Emerson cites male thinkers
like Aristophanes and Rabelais, with whom he engages in a sort of conversation: “’tis
very cheap wit that has been spent on the subject, from Aristophanes, in whose
comedies I confess my dullness to find good joke, to Rabelais in whom it is
monstruous exaggeration of temperament and not borne out by anything in nature . .
.. The body of the joke is all one, to charge them with temperament—victims of
temperament” (LL 2:25). Here, Emerson is ambiguous: on the one hand, he
denounces the two thinkers’ misogynistic comments, noting their “monstruous
exaggeration of temperament.” On the other hand, he sides with Aristophanes
suggesting that, although exaggerated, his jokes (including those on women), are
funny—"I confess my dullness to find good joke.”
B) Memoirs and Woman
Quoting other people’s words could have been Emerson’s way to delegate space
and opinions because he was feeling uncomfortable when addressing the subject.
After all, he did the same in Memoirs, where he (at least partly) delegated the task of
narrating Fuller’s life by relying abundantly on what she and her friends had written.
Emerson’s remarks on woman’s “temperament,” cited above, recall his section
“Temperament” in Memoirs. For Emerson, temperament was an impediment: as he
explained in his lecture “Woman,” “Men are not to the same degree temperamented,
for there are multitudes of men who live to objects quite out of them, as, to politics, to
trade, to letters, or an art, unhindered by any influence of constitution” (LL 2:26). In
Memoirs, writing in the first-person singular, he described how “I think, in
[Margaret’s] case, there was something abnormal in those obscure habits and
necessities which we denoted by the word Temperament. . . . She had a strong
constitution, and of course its reactions were strong” (1:227). Once again, being a

248



woman implied certain (bodily) impediments that were responsible for altering her
judgement—“I had the impression that her energy was too much a force of blood,
and therefore never felt the security for her peace which belongs to more purely
intellectual natures” (MMFO 1:228). Emerson felt different from Fuller, just like men
felt different from women in his lecture (“us” and “them”): “For the same reasons, she
remained inscrutable to me; her strength was not my strength,—her powers were a
surprise” (MMFO 1:228). Fuller’s abnormal “constitution” consisted in a series of
“peculiarities” which Emerson did not understand (“I understood these no better”):
“Her childhood was full of presentiments. She was then a somnambulist. She was
subject to attacks of delirium, and, later, perceived that she had spectral illusions”
(MMFO 1:228). These characterizations are comparable to what Emerson wrote
about women’s premonitions in his 1855 lecture, “they are the best index of the
coming hour,” “what they say and think are the shadows of coming events” (2:19),
and again in 1865, “They have divination” (LL 2:17).
Emerson’s essentialist views of womanhood did not preclude a sincere
support for women’s rights. In “Woman,” he welcomed the fact that “any remarkable
opinion or movement shared by women will be the first sign of revolution” (LL 2:19).
In his lectures, Emerson indeed pleaded in favor of social equality, which he referred
to as “mathematical justice” for women. He firmly maintained that women “have an
unquestionable right to their own property. And if a woman demand votes, offices
and political equality with men, as among the Shakers an Elder and Eldress are of
equal power, – and among the Quakers, – it must not be refused” (LL 2:26). At the
same time, however, he remained trapped in a relatively conservative vision of
womanhood, in many ways similar to the True Woman, which led him to rely

249



excessively on the so-called “sacredness” of woman and to hide behind that
concept,
I confide so entirely in her inspiring and musical nature, that I believe only
herself can show us how she shall be served. The wonderful generosity of her
sentiments raises her at times into heroical and godlike regions, and verifies the
pictures of Minerva, Juno, or Polymnia; and by the firmness with which she
treads her upward path, she convinces the coarsest calculators that another
road exists, than that which their feet know (qtd in Zwarg, Feminist 159).
In some ways Emerson was inspired by Fuller, as when he stated “I think it
impossible to separate the education and interests of the sexes. Improve and refine
the men, and you do the same by the women, whether you will or no,” but in others,
he still portrayed woman as engaged in a relation of dependence to man: “Woman
should find in man her guardian. Silently she looks for that . . . . But when he is her
guardian,—fulfilled with all nobleness,—knows and accepts his duties as brother, all
goes well for both” (LL 2:29). More generally, Emerson struggled to celebrate
womanhood for he was troubled by what he perceived as a certain intrinsic
physicality in women.
This is evident in the way in he characterises woman’s writing. In “Woman,”
he comments, “It is perhaps true that in no art or science, not in painting, poetry or
music, have women produced a masterpiece. But there is an art that is better than
painting, poetry or music, or architecture, better than botany, geology, or any
science, namely, conversation: wise, cultivated, genial, conversation” (LL 2:20).
When working on Memoirs, Emerson struggled to deal with Fuller’s writing, to which
he preferred her undisputedly brilliant conversation. Emerson recorded in more than
one instance the dissatisfaction this caused him when working on Memoirs: “In my

250



memoirs, I must record that I always find myself doing something less than my best
task. In the spring, I was writing politics; now am I writing a biography, which not the
absolute command, but facility & amiable feeling prompted” (EJ 11:434). He
explained that he was troubled by the task of relating the facts Fuller’s life for “[t]hese
things have no value, unless they lead somewhere.” He continued—"If a Burns, if a
De Stael, if an artist is the result, our attention is preengaged; but <no> quantities of
rectitude, mountains of merit, <or> chaos of ruins, are of no account without result,
—‘tis all mere nightmare; false instincts; wasted lives” (431), “Now, unhappily,
Margaret’s writing does not justify any such research. All that can be said, is, that
she represents an interesting hour & group in American cultivation; then, that she
was herself a fine, generous, inspiring, vinous, eloquent talker, who did not outlive
her influence; and a kind of justice requires of us a monument, because crowds of
vulgar people taunt her with want of position” (EJ 11:431-432). While Zwarg
maintains that the fact that Emerson “makes no mention of . . . Woman in the
Nineteenth Century or the rest of her published work was meant as ‘a protective
gesture’” (“Mythologist” 229), I believe that the aforementioned passages show that
this “muting” on Emerson’s behalf was actually due to his disregard of Fuller’s written
work. While he never mentioned Woman, Emerson devoted—accordingly to the
comments he made, previously quoted—a full chapter to “Conversation” in Memoirs
(“V. Conversations in Boston”).

Fuller’s published works, which were left out of Memoirs, were the
expressions of her most radical thoughts. Years before the “Declaration of
Sentiment” was signed (in 1848), Fuller questioned the tenets of the U.S.
“Declaration of Independence.” In a Tribune article entitled “Thanksgiving” written in

251



1844, she declared “No home can be healthful in which are not cherished seeds of
good for the world at large” (Critic 10). A year later, in Woman in the Nineteenth
Century, she remarked that “though the free American so often feels himself free,
like the Roman, only to pamper his appetites and his indolence through the misery of
his fellow beings, still it is not in vain, that the verbal statement has been made, ‘All
men are born free and equal’” (13). Fuller indeed held a “firm belief in the equality of
the sexes” (WNC 21) and understood gender differences in a ground-breaking way.
If Emerson stated that “woman demand[s] votes, offices and political equality
with men,” Fuller’s claim went beyond the demand for social equality: as she wrote in
Woman, “a religious recognition of equality is required” (WNC 42). She implemented
that claim by referring to mankind in general as opposed to insisting—as Emerson
did—on the differences between man and woman: “By man I mean both man and
woman,” Fuller explained, “these are two halves of one thought.” As seen in previous
sections of this chapter, Fuller celebrated the “feminine” while also speaking about
the individual in universal terms: in Larson’s words, “Difference is to be eradicated
inasmuch as it is an instrument of oppression and a denial of equality; difference is
to be embraced inasmuch as it is a mark of self-determination and a validation of
equality” (164). Larson reinterprets Fuller’s apparently contradictory claim that
womanhood was to be both emphasised and ignored: indeed, he explains that “the
judgment that ‘union is only possible to those who are units’ (71) has little to do with
the switching of rhetorical registers. To be equal is to overcome and therefore insist
upon difference” (164).
While Fuller denounced social inequality repeatedly, I find it important to
reiterate Reynolds’s point that she was not a political activist “in the sense that [she]
did not join organizations, attend meetings, give speeches, or participate in

252



organized political activities” (“Fern” 66). Sotiropoulos similarly remarks that “Fuller's
frustration with the shifting political winds that paralyzed reform interventions incited
her neither to political action nor to the formulation of a political ideology” (“Truth”
41). Fuller never really took an active stand in favor of abolitionism and only
supported the cause in writing: as Hanlon explains, she “expressed only passing
support for the antislavery movement, complementing abolition as logically
continuous with her own efforts to advocate for wholly transformed relations between
men and women in the United States and beyond” (81). Fuller’s fight for women’s
rights was also flawed, in a sense, by her elitism. As Kathy Kurtzman Lawrence
remarks, “Fuller’s radicalism was at first an aesthetic radicalism . . . Political
sophistication followed and was fused with aesthetic sophistication as she pursued
her dream of an America, and later of the world, of equals, but of equals who would
read Goethe, appreciate Beethoven, and admire Canova” (273).
Certainly, Fuller had high expectations of her readers. In the “Preface” of
Woman, she explained her new title, describing how “The Great Lawsuit. Man
Versus Men. Woman Versus Women” had become Woman in the Nineteenth
Century: “Objections having been made to the former title, as not sufficiently easy to
be understood, the present has been submitted as expressive of the main purpose of
the essay.” She then added, “though, by myself, the other is preferred, partly for the
reason others do not like it, i.e., that it requires some thought to see what it means,
and might thus prepare the reader to meet me on my own ground” (WNC 5). Fuller
was clear about what she expected of her readers—Woman “solicit[s] a sincere and
patient attention from those who open the following pages at all” (WNC 5).
Unfortunately, many of her readers, among whom Orestes Brownson, who read and
reviewed Woman, also failed understand it: “As we read along in the book, we keep

253



constantly asking, What is the lady driving at? What does she want? But no answer
comes” (250).
In her “Preface,” Fuller was not only talking to men and women altogether;
she specifically addressed men: “From men I ask a noble and earnest attention to
any thing that can be offered on this great and still obscure subject, such as I have
met from many with whom I stand in private relations” (WNC 6). She referred herself
to male models of virtue, husbands who were also supporters of women’s rights, like
Godwin: “The champion of the Rights of Woman found, in Godwin, one who would
plead that cause like a brother” (WNC 44). Interestingly, women’s rights activists are
still uttering a similar call to their male readers. In a recent interview for GQ
magazine, Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (the first female politician to be featured on the
cover of the magazine) discussed with Wesley Lowery, her interviewer, the recent
overturning of Roe Versus Wade by the Supreme Court, stressing the fact that “we
need men to be speaking up. . . as well.” About the specific threat to women’s control
of their own bodies, Ocasio-Cortez emphasised the importance of men’s role in
achieving change: "In this moment it’s really only going to be the vulnerability of men,
and men talking to other men, that gives us the greatest hope of shifting things the
fastest, soonest.” Thinking about future generations and how they might be
influenced (as they turned out to be) by her work, Fuller wrote Woman “for the
daughters and the sons of time; twin exponents of a divine thought” (WNC 5). As
Cole notes, by invoking a Higher Law (the law of “truth, unpolluted by prejudice,
vanity, or selfishness” [WNC 6]), Fuller “had become prophet and legal advocate at
once” (“Lawsuit” 13).

254



Conclusion
In The Poetic Discourse of American Transcendentalism (2013), Albena Bakratcheva
remarks that Emerson “valued [Fuller] selectively” and that “despite the admiration she
inspired, the very nature of Margaret Fuller’s intellectualism seemed distant to
Emerson . . . because its forceful movements had their springs in faraway, transatlantic
lands – something Margaret Fuller was far from attempting to hide” (136). Having
examined Emerson’s portrayal of Fuller in Memoirs, I side with Bakratcheva’s
comment that there were only a limited number of aspects of Fuller’s personality that
Emerson liked. And although I am not convinced that the distance between Emerson
and Fuller was only of a “geographic” nature—it also had to do with gender differences,
which transcend national borders—I do think that Fuller’s move to Italy in the last years
of her life exacerbated latent differences between the two thinkers.
As critics have shown, Fuller’s Italian years coincided with (and also, fostered)
important changes in her political thinking. About this, Daniel Malachuk notes:
Turn finally to Fuller’s actual Dispatches and one finds, alongside her
enduring commitment to conscience and higher law, an increasing assurance
that it will be democracy—as she witnessed it in the radical pre-1848 activities
in Europe—that ultimately enables the realization of sacred persons. (Two
Cities 94)
Malachuk also describes how those changes in Fuller’s Transcendentalism were
inspired in part by the men she met in Italy: “Mazzini’s democratic idealism is
specifically associated with the realization of sacred persons. In a February 19,
1847, dispatch, Fuller recalls her notion of the individual’s ‘inheritance’ from ‘The
Great Lawsuit’; rather than being achieved through a higher court, however, the

255



sacred person is to be perfected through participation in democratic revolution” (Two
Cities 95). Having experienced social inequality herself, Fuller could easily relate to
the cause of European revolutionaries. After all, her trip to Europe was a strong
reminder of the continuous discrimination women faced in the nineteenth century.
Fuller had long dreamt of going to Europe and, in 1836, she planned to go abroad
with her friend Eliza Farrar. The death of her father in October 1835 forced her,
however, to cancel the trip as she became responsible for her family, which
prompted a violent realisation of how society was built on a system of profound
economic inequality. Ten years later, as she was about to leave for Europe, Fuller
told her friends that her trip had been too long delayed to have much effect on her
intellectual and emotional development. That couldn’t have been more wrong.
Mazzini was not the only revolutionary who attracted Fuller’s attention.
Eventually chosen as the godfather of her son, Adam Mickiewicz—a Polish poet,
essayist, and political revolutionary who lived in Paris as an exile—met Fuller in
1846, and the two became quickly became close friends. In a letter written in 1847,
Mickiewicz described with powerful clarity the long-lasting effects of Fuller’s avantgardist socio-political reflections, and the classical nature of her literary and
philosophical education: “Her base is in the old world; her sphere of action is in the
new world; her peace is in the world to come” (FL 5:176). But among the encounters
Fuller made while travelling through Europe, between 1846 and 1850, I consider
Fuller’s union with Giovanni Angelo Ossoli, as the embodiment of her transformation
through travel (and of her transformation as a woman). For while revolts were
erupting in Europe during the years she spent there as a resident, a revolution also
took place in Fuller’s personal life: indeed, her passionate support for the emergence
of an Italian state was mirrored by a more intimate but equally radical change in her

256



experience as a person, as a woman. After a series of romantic disappointments,
Fuller had fallen in love with Ossoli and, in September 1848, the couple welcomed a
son, Angelino. The way in which Fuller commented on such change demonstrates
just how different she had become from her fellow Transcendentalists.
The dispatches that Fuller continued to send to Greeley during the years she
spent in Europe show that she was totally immersed herself in the culture she wrote
about. When she first arrived in Rome, she described it as a place which finally
allowed her to feel true happiness: in a letter written in December 1847, she
recounted how “My life at Rome is thus far all I hoped. I have not been so well since I
was a child, nor so happy ever as during the last six weeks” (FL 4:312). In the spring
of that year, Fuller had met Ossoli for the first time, outside Saint Peter’s Cathedral in
Rome, soon after which he had also proposed to her. But Italy was more than just a
fateful encounter. Experiencing a kind of Platonic Recognition, Fuller reunited with
those ideals and culture she had grown up with thanks to the strict, classical
education that her father had imparted to her along with his beliefs in Republican
idealism. When in Italy, she was able to see the works of Raphael, Titian,
Domenichino, and also to discover artists she did not know before—“The Frescoes
of Carracci and his scholars in the Farnese Palace have been to me a source of the
purest pleasure” (Reynolds, Glorious 135) she wrote in one of her dispatches. The
concept of “pleasure” is not only related to the obvious gratification through art that
Fuller and her fellow Transcendentalists believed in; yet it is also part of a
synaesthesia of sensations—happy sensations—that characterised her experience
in Italy.
Fuller never shied away from how strongly transformative those years were to
her: while in America she had laid the foundations for her most radical ideas, the

257



ones expressed in “The Great Lawsuit” and in, Italy acted on Fuller as the
consecration of her new self—“in thought,” she wrote in 1849, “I am more radical
than ever” (MMFO 2:314). Fuller felt at home in Italy, which, she explained, “receives
me as a long-lost child, and I feel myself at home here, and if I ever tell anything
about it, you will hear something real and domestic” (MMFO 2:220). The adjectives
“real and domestic” refer to her union with Ossoli, which she liked to describe in
similar terms as those she used to speak about the Italian capital—“In him, I have
found a home, and one that interferes with no tie” (FL 5:261). In Ossoli, an
impoverished nobleman from Lazio, she admired the passion and patriotism—"he is
capable of the sacred love, . . . he showed it to his father, to Rome, to me, now he
loves his child in the same way” (FL 5:292).
For a Transcendentalist like Fuller, spirit and nobility were fundamental
qualities to be had. Although Ossoli did not afford her economic stability, he certainly
fulfilled her emotional expectations: she loved Ossoli’s “purity and simple strength of
his character” (5:291), was extremely happy with the “experience of [being] a mother
and satisfied domestic wants in a most sincere and sweet companion” (FL 5:248).
The idea of pleasure—of “satisfaction”—appears once again in Fuller’s writing for it
wasn’t only contemplative gratification, but it was also a very pragmatic and intimate
feeling of happiness that Italy had given her. In a letter to her sister Ellen, written in
December 1849, Fuller describes in similar terms how much motherly love had
changed her: “The great novelty, the immense gain to me is my relation with my
child. I thought the mother’s heart lived in me before, but it did not. I knew nothing
about it” (FL 5:292).
As the repeated use of adjectives such “real,” “simple” indicate, Fuller knew
how different Ossoli was from the people she had surrounded herself with back in

258



America. She indeed apprehended her return to the United States and was
particularly frightened by how she was going to be received once back in New
England, accompanied by her foreign husband and their child—the existence of
whom she had announced quite late to her friends and family. The way in which she
tried to justify her love for her husband in a letter to William Henry Channing shows
how afraid she was of being judged: she described Ossoli as “my gentle friend,
ignorant of great ideas, ignorant of books, enlightened as to his duties by pure
sentiment and an unspoiled nature, but never failing in the degree his nature has
once promised” (FL 5:252). In fact, the same reasons that attracted her to her
husband also led her to believe that he would not be particularly welcomed by her
friends and family back in America. To her mother, she admitted that “[h]e is not in
any respect such a person as people in general would expect to find with me” (FL
5:261). As Sonia Di Loreto observes, “in Fuller’s coterie, the Ossolis as a couple
would be a dissonance, and Giovanni, the Italian who had been represented by
Fuller’s American friends as a semi-literate, although well-meaning young man,
would be an even more problematic figure” (5). In a letter to her sister Ellen in
December 1849, she complained that Emerson had failed to reply after she had told
him about her marriage—“My love to dear Elizh I wish she and Mr Emerson would
write to me, but I suppose they dont know what to say tell them there is no need to
say anything about these affairs if they dont want to. I am just the same for them I
was before” (FL 5:293).
The difficulty in writing about Fuller’s marriage for the authors of Memoirs did
not only arise from the uncertainty surrounding Fuller’s union with Ossoli, but it also
derived from a certain difficulty to deal with the difference between what Fuller had
once been in New England and what she had become in Europe. For, in Europe, she

259



experienced for the first time sexuality and motherhood and that had to have a
strong impact on someone whose intellectual activity had been centred on defining
“woman” and “man” for the past ten years.
While in Italy, Fuller stated: “I am in a state of unnatural divorce from what I
was most allied to” (2:222). Fuller was in total “communion,” as she wrote in many
letters, with “the spirit of Rome” to the point that, when the Romans lost against the
French, Fuller felt like “Private hopes of mine are fallen with the hopes of Italy”
(MMFO 2:265). The Rome in which Fuller lived for the last years of her life was a
place of great Republican and Democratic enthusiasm, thanks to heroic figures like
Mazzini, Garibaldi and other patriots who were trying to get rid of the various
occupying regimes. However, it was also a period of great violence, which Fuller
witnessed literally at her doorstep: in a letter to Emerson, which appears in Memoirs,
Fuller describes how from her apartment in Piazza Barberini she could not only hear
but she saw “a battle fought here from the first till the last light of day” (2:264). Not
only was Ossoli part of the Roman effort for independence, but Fuller also took a
direct role in the war effort as a volunteer nurse at the hospital Fate Bene Fratelli. In
a letter to the Marchioness Visconti Arconati, written at the conclusion of her Italian
journey, she asked “will you have patience with my democracy, -- my revolutionary
spirit?” (2:314). Acting like a sort of seal for her transformation through travel, Fuller
asked to be addressed by her new name, “Marchesa Ossoli” (MMFO 2:317).
It seems as though Fuller’s European/Italian experience also coincided with a
certain detachment from some Anglo-Saxon ways: she wrote “I suffer more than
ever from that which is peculiarly American or English” (MMFO 2:222). And yet, she
was appreciative of how much interest her dispatches had generated back in the US:
she was happy about “how cordially America sympathized. She [America] did not

260



hug herself in selfish content with her more prosperous fortune; she glowed at the
hope of relief for the suffering nations of Europe; she deeply mourned its overthrow;
she is indignant at the treachery that consummated it” (Reynolds, Glorious 316). In
Fuller’s words, and in this particular dispatch, we hear the echo of John O’ Sullivan’s
“Manifest Destiny”—the idea that the American Democracy should serve as an
example, and the beginning of Imperialism. Fuller described how “America is the star
of hope to the enclaved nations, bitter indeed were the night of the world if that star
were hid by foul vapors” (Reynolds, Glorious 317). Interesting to note here how
Fuller’s praise comes with a disclaimer, and yet she sees American Democracy as a
symbol and role-model for other freedom-aspiring nations.
Fuller’s experience in Italy informed her vision of America and of the American
democracy. Her transformation through travel, triggered by her new understanding of
womanhood and also by the political events she witnessed and participated in,
allowed her to cast a new look on her homeland. Although her manuscript of her
history of the Italian Revolution was lost at sea, and we don’t know what her
conclusions exactly were at the end of the European journey, we know that Fuller’s
personal and political transformation coincided both in time and in place. While in
Italy, Fuller had become interested in that specific point where the life of thought and
the life of action intersect. She had drawn further away from Emerson’s pure
idealism as she experienced war and womanhood.
Despite their best efforts to quote her and the people she was close to, the
authors of Memoirs never managed to tell the complete story of Fuller’s life. Their
portrayal, as we know, was partial to say the least. What emerges from my analysis
of the biography, which I have conducted by focusing on Emerson’s sections in
particular, is that fears related to the danger that a woman intellectual of Fuller’s

261



stance represented to nineteenth-century masculinity, came into play and hampered
what could otherwise have been “an essential line of American history.” Instead,
Emerson, who was himself disappointed of the result the biographers obtained (see
his letter to William Furness, in which he defined it as a work of “questionable
judgement”), remained trapped within the “woman” or “artist” dichotomy, as he
painted Fuller as both a woman who was not “womanly” enough and an artist who
was not “artistic” enough (her judgment being impeded by her “emotions”).
Nevertheless, as this thesis has shown, Memoirs of Margaret Fuller Ossoli
has an essential part to play in our understanding of American Transcendentalism. It
documents the lives and relationships of Transcendentalism’s most important
proponents; it tells the story of how they related to written material and issues of
privacy; it informs our reading of Emerson’s feeble support for women’s rights, on
which critics are more and more laying their attention; it shows how
Transcendentalists dealt with the notions of posterity and reputation, and it reveals,
more particularly, how gender affected not only the way in which Transcendentalists
told their stories but also how they were remembered.

262



